William, Prince of Wales KG, KT, PC, ADC (William Arthur Philip Louis; born 21 June 1982), is the heir apparent to the British throne. He is the elder son of King Charles III and Diana, Princess of Wales. William was born during the reign of his paternal grandmother, Queen Elizabeth II. He was educated at Wetherby School, Ludgrove School and Eton College. He earned a Master of Arts degree in geography at the University of St Andrews where he met his future wife, Catherine Middleton. They have three children: George, Charlotte and Louis. After university, William trained at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst prior to serving with the Blues and Royals. In 2008 William graduated from the Royal Air Force College Cranwell, joining the RAF Search and Rescue Force in early 2009. He served as a full-time pilot with the East Anglian Air Ambulance for two years, starting in July 2015. William performs official duties and engagements on behalf of the monarch. He holds patronage with over 30 charitable and military organisations, including the Tusk Trust, Centrepoint, The Passage, Wales Air Ambulance and London's Air Ambulance Charity. He undertakes projects through the Royal Foundation, with his charity work revolving around mental health, conservation, homelessness and emergency workers. In 2020 William launched the Earthshot Prize, a £50 million initiative to incentivise environmental solutions over the next decade. William was made Duke of Cambridge immediately before his wedding in April 2011. He became Duke of Cornwall and Duke of Rothesay following his father's accession to the throne on 8 September 2022. The following day he was made Prince of Wales. Prince William was born on 21 June 1982 in St Mary's Hospital, London, at 21:03 BST, as the first child of Charles, Prince of Wales (later King Charles III), and his first wife, Diana, Princess of Wales, during the reign of his paternal grandmother, Queen Elizabeth II. Buckingham Palace announced his name – William Arthur Philip Louis – on 28 June. William was christened in the Music Room of Buckingham Palace by the then Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Runcie, on 4 August, coinciding with the 82nd birthday of his paternal great-grandmother, Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother. William was the first child born to a Prince and Princess of Wales since Prince John was born to Prince George and Princess Mary (later King George V and Queen Mary) in July 1905. When he was nine months old, William accompanied his parents on their 1983 tour of Australia and New Zealand, as his first trip overseas. It also marked the first time that a royal baby was taken on an overseas tour. His younger brother, Prince Harry, was born in September 1984. Both of them were raised at Kensington Palace in London, and Highgrove House in Gloucestershire. Known informally as "Wills" within his family, William was nicknamed "Willy" by his brother and "Wombat" by his mother. Diana wished her sons to obtain broader and more typical life experiences beyond royal upbringing, taking them to Walt Disney World, McDonald's, AIDS clinics and shelters for the homeless. Biographer Robert Lacey asserts that William, a "rambunctious" and "bratty" child, grew "more reflective" with a "noticeably quiet character" as he began boarding school. Diana was reported to have described William as "my little wise old man" on whom she started to rely as her confidant by his early teens. William carried out his first public engagement while accompanying his parents on a visit to Llandaff on Saint David's Day in 1991. He and Harry travelled to Canada on an official visit with their parents in 1991 and again with Charles in 1998. William's parents divorced in 1996. Diana died in a car accident in the early hours of 31 August 1997. William, then aged 15, together with his 12-year-old brother and their father, was staying at Balmoral Castle at the time. The following morning, Charles informed William and Harry of their mother's death. William was reportedly uncertain as to whether he should walk behind his mother's coffin during the funeral procession. His grandfather Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, told him: "If you don't walk, I think you'll regret it later. If I walk, will you walk with me?". At the funeral, William and Harry walked alongside their father, grandfather, and maternal uncle, Charles Spencer, 9th Earl Spencer, behind the funeral cortège from Kensington Palace to Westminster Abbey. After his mother's death, William stated that he was "in a state of shock for many years". He and Harry inherited the majority of the £12.9 million left by their mother on their respective 30th birthdays, a figure that had grown to £10 million each by 2014. In 2014, the brothers inherited their mother's wedding dress along with many other of her personal possessions including dresses, diamond tiaras, jewels, letters and paintings. They also received the original lyrics and score of "Candle in the Wind" by Bernie Taupin and Elton John as performed by the latter at Diana's funeral. In 2002, The Times reported that William and Harry would also share £4.9 million from trust funds established by their great-grandmother on their respective 21st birthdays, as well as £8 million upon their respective 40th birthdays. William was educated at private schools, starting at Jane Mynors' nursery school and the pre-preparatory Wetherby School, both in London. Following this, he attended Ludgrove School near Wokingham, Berkshire, and was privately tutored during summers by Rory Stewart. At Ludgrove, he participated in football, swimming, basketball, clay pigeon shooting, and cross country running. He was subsequently admitted to Eton College, studying geography, biology, and history of art at A-Level. He obtained an 'A' in geography, a 'C' in biology, and a 'B' in history of art. William was captain of the swimming team and his house football team at Eton, also taking up water polo. The decision to place William at Eton went against the family tradition of sending royal children to Gordonstoun, which his father and grandfather both attended. Diana's brother and father were both Eton students. The royal family and the tabloid press agreed that William would be allowed to study free from intrusion in exchange for regular updates about his life. John Wakeham, chairman of the Press Complaints Commission, stated "Prince William is not an institution; nor a soap star; nor a football hero. He is a boy: in the next few years, perhaps the most important and sometimes painful part of his life, he will grow up and become a man." While at Eton, he often had tea on weekends at the nearby Windsor Castle with his grandmother, discussing state boxes and constitutional duties meant to "prepare [him] as future King." In June 1991, William was admitted to the Royal Berkshire Hospital after being accidentally hit on the forehead by a fellow pupil wielding a golf club. He suffered a depressed fracture of the skull and was operated on at Great Ormond Street Hospital, resulting in a permanent scar. The incident received widespread media attention. In 1999, he underwent an operation on his left hand after he broke a finger. After completing his studies at Eton, William took a gap year, during which he took part in British Army training exercises in Belize, worked on English dairy farms, and visited Africa. As part of the Raleigh International programme in the town of Tortel in southern Chile, William worked for ten weeks on local construction projects and taught English. He lived with other young volunteers, sharing in the common household chores. His interest in African culture prompted him to teach himself Swahili. In 2001, William enrolled at the University of St Andrews in Scotland. Similar to his time at Eton, the media agreed not to invade his privacy, and students were warned not to leak stories to the press. William embarked on a degree course in Art History but later changed his main subject to Geography. He focused his dissertation on the Indian Ocean's Rodrigues coral reefs and graduated with an undergraduate Master of Arts (MA Hons) degree with upper second class honours in 2005. While at university, he represented the Scottish national universities water polo team at the Celtic Nations tournament in 2004. He was reportedly known as "Steve" by other students to avoid any journalists overhearing and realising his identity. At the age of 21, William was appointed a Counsellor of State; he first served in that capacity when the Queen attended the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in the same year. In July 2005, he embarked on his first solo public engagements on an overseas tour of New Zealand, travelling to participate in World War II commemorations. According to author Tina Brown, he had, like his father, expressed a desire to become Governor-General of Australia. In 2009, the Queen set up a private office for William and Harry with David Manning as their adviser. Manning accompanied William on his first official tour in January 2010 as he toured Auckland and Wellington; William opened the new building of the Supreme Court of New Zealand and was welcomed by a Māori chief. The visit spurred crowds of "many thousands", with positive public reception compared to that of his mother's 1983 tour. In March 2011, William visited Christchurch, New Zealand, shortly after the earthquake, and spoke at the memorial service at Hagley Park on behalf of his grandmother. He also travelled to Australia to visit areas affected by flooding in Queensland and Victoria. Upon graduation from university, William interned in land management at Chatsworth House and in banking at HSBC. To prepare for his eventual management of the Duchy of Cornwall, in 2014, he additionally participated in a Cambridge practical agriculture management degree run by the Cambridge Programme for Sustainability Leadership (CPSL), of which his father is patron. Having decided on a military career, William was admitted to the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst in January 2006. As "Lieutenant Wales" – a name based on his father's then title Prince of Wales – he followed his brother into the Blues and Royals as a troop commander in an armoured reconnaissance unit, after which he spent five months training for the post at Bovington Camp in Dorset. Despite the Queen's approval for William to serve on the frontline, his position as second-in-line to the throne at the time cast doubts on his chances of seeing combat. Plans by the Ministry of Defence to send William to Southern Iraq leaked and the government eventually decided against sending him as it would endanger both his life and the lives of people around him if he was targeted. William instead trained in the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force, obtaining his commission as a sub-lieutenant in the former and a flying officer in the latter, both broadly equivalent to the army rank of lieutenant. After completing his training, he undertook an attachment with the Royal Air Force at RAF Cranwell. Upon completing the course he was presented with his RAF wings by his father, who had received his own wings after training at Cranwell. During this secondment, William flew to Afghanistan in a C-17 Globemaster that repatriated the body of Trooper Robert Pearson. William was then seconded to train with the Royal Navy. He then completed an accelerated Naval Officer training course at the Britannia Royal Naval College. Whilst serving on HMS Iron Duke in July 2008, William participated in a £40m drug seizure in the Atlantic, north-east of Barbados. He was part of the crew on the Lynx helicopter which helped seize 900 kg of cocaine from a speedboat, for which he was awarded the United States Joint Services Achievement Medal. In January 2009, William transferred his commission to the RAF and was promoted to Flight Lieutenant. He trained to become a helicopter pilot with the RAF's Search and Rescue Force. In January 2010, he graduated from the Defence Helicopter Flying School at RAF Shawbury. In January 2010, he transferred to the Search and Rescue Training Unit at RAF Valley, Anglesey, to receive training on the Sea King search and rescue helicopter; he graduated in September 2010. This made him the first member of the British royal family since Henry VII to live in Wales. William's first rescue mission as co-pilot of a RAF Sea King was in response to an emergency call from Liverpool Coastguard in October 2010. In November 2011, he participated in a search-and-rescue mission involving a cargo ship that was sinking in the Irish Sea; William, as a co-pilot, helped rescue two sailors. He was deployed to the Falkland Islands for a six-week tour with No. 1564 Flight from February to March 2012. The Argentine government condemned William's deployment to the islands close to the 30th anniversary of the beginning of the Falklands War as a "provocative act". In June 2012, he gained a qualification to be captain or pilot in command of a Sea King rather than a co-pilot. His active service as an RAF search-and-rescue pilot ended in September 2013. He conducted 156 search and rescue operations, which resulted in 149 people being rescued. He later became patron to the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight. In July 2015, William began working full-time as a pilot with the East Anglian Air Ambulance (EAAA) based at Cambridge Airport, which he felt was a natural progression from his previous search-and-rescue role. He donated his full salary to the EAAA charity. William required a civil pilot's licence and further training before being permitted to begin his role. He underwent part of his training at Norwich Airport. William described working irregular shifts and dealing mostly with critical care cases. He also discussed the impact of witnessing intensive trauma and bereavement on his mental health and personal life. The BBC has written that William was "exposed to the National Health Service in a way that no other senior royal has been or possibly ever will be." William left his position with EAAA in July 2017 to assume full-time royal duties. After supporting an anniversary campaign for London's Air Ambulance Charity in 2019, he became the charity's official patron in March 2020. In May 2020, he granted permission to the charity to use Kensington Palace's private lawn to refuel during the COVID-19 pandemic. To mark Air Ambulance Week 2020, he wrote a letter thanking air ambulance workers, stating his "profound respect" for the community, particularly during the "immeasurably difficult" outbreak. In February 2023, he became patron of the Wales Air Ambulance charity. In 2001 William met Catherine Middleton, while they were students in residence at St Salvator's Hall, at the University of St Andrews, and they became close friends. She reportedly caught William's attention at a charity fashion show at the university in 2002 when she appeared on the stage wearing a see-through lace dress. During their second year, William shared a flat with Middleton and two other friends. The couple began dating in 2003. From 2003 to 2005 they both resided at Balgove House on the Strathtyrum estate with two roommates. In 2004 the couple briefly split but reconciled soon afterwards. The relationship was followed closely by the tabloid press. Media attention became so intense that William asked the press to keep their distance from Middleton. In December 2006, Middleton and her family attended William's passing out parade at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst. In April 2007 William and Middleton were reported to have split. Middleton and her family attended the Concert for Diana three months later; the couple were subsequently reported to have "rekindled their relationship". She was in attendance during the Order of the Garter procession ceremony at Windsor Castle in June 2008, where William was made a Royal Knight of the Garter. In June 2010 the couple moved into a cottage on the Bodorgan Estate in Anglesey, Wales, where they resided until 2014. The couple became engaged in October 2010 while on holiday in Kenya. Clarence House announced their engagement on 16 November. William gave his fianceé his mother's engagement ring. The wedding took place in Westminster Abbey on 29 April 2011. About a million people lined the wedding procession route in London, while the global audience for the wedding was reported to be over 300 million. William and Catherine used Nottingham Cottage as their London home until 2013, when £4.5 million renovations completed at Apartment 1A at Kensington Palace, which continues to be their official residence in the capital. The couple were given the country house Anmer Hall, on the Sandringham Estate, as a wedding gift from the Queen, where they lived from 2015 to 2017. Kensington Palace was the couple's main residence until 2022, when the family moved to Adelaide Cottage in Windsor. Catherine's first pregnancy was announced on 3 December 2012. She was admitted on 22 July 2013 to the Lindo Wing of St Mary's Hospital, London, where Prince William had been delivered. Later that day, she gave birth to Prince George. On 8 September 2014, it was announced that Catherine was pregnant with her second child. She was admitted on 2 May 2015 to the same hospital and gave birth to Princess Charlotte. Catherine's third pregnancy was announced on 4 September 2017; Prince Louis was born on 23 April 2018. William and Catherine have owned two English Cocker Spaniels, named Lupo and Orla. William was created Duke of Cambridge, Earl of Strathearn, and Baron Carrickfergus on the day of his wedding in April 2011. He and Catherine toured Canada that summer, attending Canada Day celebrations on Parliament Hill; William delivered speeches at Quebec City Hall and Northwest Territories, the former entirely in French and the latter including phrases from the Na-Dene and Inuvialuktun languages. Following initial public indifference the couple drew crowds of up to half a million and were praised for their relatability, with William referred to "comfortably" as a "prince of Canada" by the CBC. William and Catherine served as ambassadors for the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, during multiple sporting events throughout the games. In September that year, they toured Singapore, Malaysia, Tuvalu, and the Solomon Islands as part of the Queen's Diamond Jubilee celebrations. William hosted his first investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace in October 2013, an "extension of the Duke of Cambridge's public duties" after leaving the Royal Air Force. In April 2014 he and Catherine undertook a royal tour to New Zealand and Australia with their son, George. The tour was well-received by local press, with the New Zealand prime minister, John Key, crediting the couple with alleviating republican sentiment. In August that year, William, Catherine and Harry represented the royal family at World War I commemorations in Belgium. In December 2014 William and Catherine visited New York and Washington DC, where he made a speech at the World Bank condemning the illegal trade in wildlife. In 2015 and 2016 William embarked on various visits of Asian countries, including Japan, China, Bhutan and India; he was the first royal to visit mainland China in almost three decades, with the press referring to William's diplomacy as "deft" and "polished". In response to media allegations of being "work-shy," William asserted his commitment to his duties, emphasizing his dedication to fatherhood and his role in air ambulance work. Countries visited by William and Catherine in 2017 included France, Poland, Germany, and Belgium. In January 2018 the couple visited Sweden and Norway. The visits, which were, like others, requested by the Foreign Office, were interpreted to benefit UK-European relations post Brexit. In June 2018 William toured Jordan, Israel and Palestine. William and Catherine toured Pakistan in October 2019, which was the royal family's first visit to the country in 13 years. In November 2020, it was reported that William had tested positive for COVID-19 in April but decided not to alert the media to 'avoid alarming the nation'. The Daily Telegraph reported he had been "very ill" and had isolated away from his family; other sources said that he had not been seriously ill, not bed-ridden and working for most of the time. In December that year, the couple embarked on a tour of England, Scotland, and Wales via the British royal train "to pay tribute to the inspiring work" of communities and charities in 2020. Boris Johnson expressed his support, while Scottish first minister Nicola Sturgeon criticised the tour, citing travel restrictions; local governments were consulted before planning the tour. In William's capacity as Lord High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, he and Catherine toured the country in May 2021. In Cornwall in June 2021, the couple attended the G7 summit for the first time, meeting with Joe and Jill Biden. In March 2022, the couple embarked on a tour of Belize, the Bahamas and Jamaica as part of the Queen's Platinum Jubilee celebrations. They encountered political and press criticism, given his family's ancestral connections to colonialism and the Atlantic slave trade. Reparations for slavery emerged as a major demand of public protesters during the couple's visit. In a speech in Jamaica, William stated that the royal family would accept each country's decision on republicanism with "pride and respect". During the unveiling of the National Windrush Monument in London, William described the tour as "an opportunity to reflect" and condemned racism faced by both members of the Windrush generation and British minorities in 2022. In May 2022 William attended the State Opening of Parliament for the first time as a counsellor of state, where his father delivered the Queen's Speech on behalf of William's grandmother. Queen Elizabeth II died on 8 September 2022, and William's father succeeded as Charles III. William, now heir apparent, was created Prince of Wales by his father on 9 September. Controversy regarding the title became a topic of public debate in Wales. By 17 September, a petition calling for the end of the title had received over 30,000 signatures, while a YouGov poll showed 66 per cent support for William to be given the title compared to 22 percent of respondents opposed. On 30 October, Senedd Llywydd Elin Jones noted that an investiture is not a constitutional requirement and suggested that contemporary Wales would deem it unnecessary. Kensington Palace also stated an investiture is "not on the table". As the eldest son of the British monarch, William has inherited the Duchy of Cornwall, which brings him additional income. The duchy is "a £760 million (about US$1.25 billion) entity established in 1337" to provide a private income to the monarch's eldest son. William and Catherine visited Anglesey and Swansea on 27 September 2022, which marked their first visit to Wales since becoming Prince and Princess of Wales. He visited the Senedd in November 2022, meeting the Welsh first minister Mark Drakeford. In February 2023, William and Catherine visited Falmouth, marking their first visit to the region since becoming Duke and Duchess of Cornwall. In March 2023 he undertook a solo visit to Poland during which he visited Rzeszów to meet Polish and British troops and Ukrainian refugees, and had talks with Polish president Andrzej Duda at the Presidential Palace. In October 2023, William and Catherine condemned the Hamas-led attack on Israel. In February 2024, he visited the headquarters of the British Red Cross, where he met humanitarian aid workers supporting civilians during the Israel–Gaza conflict, and called for an end to the fighting in a statement approved by the UK government. Later that month, William pulled out at the last moment from of the thanksgiving service of his godfather, Constantine II of Greece, due to an undisclosed "personal matter". The same month, he visited Western Marble Arch Synagogue to acknowledge the increase in antisemitism and human suffering in the Middle East. William became aware of HIV/AIDS in the mid-1990s when he accompanied his mother and brother on visits to shelters and clinics for patients. In January 2005, he and Harry volunteered at a British Red Cross aid distribution centre to pack emergency supplies for countries affected by the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami. Later, in May 2005, William spent two weeks in North Wales with Mountain Rescue England and Wales (MREW). In May 2007, he became patron of MREW and president of the Royal Marsden Hospital, the latter of which was a role previously held by his mother. In July 2007, William and Harry organised the Concert for Diana, in memory of their mother, which benefitted the charities and patronages of Diana, William, and Harry. In October 2008, the brothers embarked on the 1,000 mile eight-day Enduro Africa motorbike ride across South Africa to raise money for Sentebale, UNICEF and the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund. In 2010, William became a patron of 100 Women in Hedge Funds' philanthropic initiatives for the following three years until 2012. He succeeded Lord Attenborough in 2010 as the fifth president of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts. In March 2011, he and Catherine set up a gift fund held by The Foundation of Prince William and Prince Harry to allow well-wishers to donate money to charities supporting the armed forces, children, the elderly, art, sport and conservation in lieu of gifts. The charity was later renamed the Royal Foundation. William has spoken out for LGBT rights as part of his work against cyberbullying, stating the importance of being "proud of the person you are" and discussing the effects of online abuse and discrimination. In 2016, he appeared in the July issue of Attitude and became the first member of the royal family to be featured on the cover of a gay magazine. He was recognised at the British LGBT Awards in May 2017. William hosted a commemorative Pride Month discussion with mental health charity volunteers at the Royal Vauxhall Tavern in June 2023. In March 2020, William appeared in a video for the National Emergencies Trust, launching a fundraising appeal to help charities during the pandemic. The appeal raised £11 million in its first week, eventually totalling to £90 million, with the money going out to "front line charities" and to the UK Community Foundations to be distributed among "local community foundations". In April 2020, he officially became patron of the organisation. Later that month, he made a surprise appearance on The Big Night In, a telethon held during the COVID-19 pandemic, in a skit which he held a video call with Stephen Fry, who reprised his role as (a descendant of) Lord Melchett, from the Blackadder series. In December 2020, William and Catherine became joint patrons of NHS Charities Together. In February 2021, he visited a vaccination centre in King's Lynn and later encouraged use of the vaccine, denouncing false information that could cause vaccine hesitancy. In May 2021, William got his first dose of COVID-19 vaccine by NHS staff at the Science Museum in London. In September 2021, it was reported that he had assisted in the evacuation of an Afghan officer, a Royal Military Academy Sandhurst graduate and aide to British troops, from Kabul airport, along with over 10 of his family members, during the 2021 Taliban offensive. In March 2022 amid the Russian invasion of Ukraine, William and Catherine made a donation to help the refugees. In February 2023, they donated to the Disasters Emergency Committee (DEC) which was helping victims of the 2023 Turkey–Syria earthquake. In July 2023, William became patron of the appeal to launch The Fleming Centre, driving a new global movement to tackle antimicrobial resistance. William became patron of the Tusk Trust in December 2005, a charity that works towards conserving wildlife and initiating community development across Africa. He carried out his first official duty with the Trust in launching a 5,000-mile (8,000 km) bike ride across the African continent in April 2008. Later, William helped with launching the Tusk Conservation Awards, which have been presented to selected environmental activists annually since 2013. In June 2010, he and his brother visited Botswana, Lesotho, and South Africa, undertaking projects relating to wildlife, sport, and young children. In 2013, he succeeded his grandfather, the Duke of Edinburgh, as president of Fields in Trust. He established the United for Wildlife Transport Taskforce in December 2014, with the goal of reducing global illegal wildlife trade. In 2014, Jane Goodall stated that William had expressed the view that all ivory in the royal collection needed to be destroyed. William has occasionally commented on the effects of overpopulation on the wildlife of Africa, but his remarks have been criticised in the media for not taking resource consumption and population density into consideration. After two years of research, William launched the Earthshot Prize in October 2020, designed to provide funding and incentive for environmental solutions over the next decade. The Prize will be awarded every year from 2021 until 2030 to five winners each year, in accordance with five categories detailing the restoration of nature, air cleanliness, ocean conservation, waste-free living, and climate change. Following the launch, he gave a TED Talk on environmental protection and conservation as part of the TED Countdown climate change initiative. Later that month, William took over the patronages of Fauna and Flora International and the British Trust for Ornithology, passed on from his grandparents. In the same month, he appeared in an ITV documentary titled Prince William: A Planet For Us All to discuss environmental issues. In 2021, William made a private donation to the Thin Green Line Foundation, which provides grants for the relatives of conservation park rangers that are killed every year while protecting wildlife. In July 2022, he condemned the murder of South African park ranger Anton Mzimba and asked for the responsible parties to "be brought to justice". In August 2022, William voiced his support for the 63-month prison sentence given in the United States to a man responsible for trafficking rhinoceros horns and elephant ivory. He had previously called for harsher punishments and penalties for poachers and smugglers at the Illegal Wildlife Trade Conference in 2018. Since 2009, William has been patron of Child Bereavement UK, which provides support to children and families who have lost a loved one. In 2016, the Royal Foundation launched multiple mental health initiatives, including Heads Together, a campaign led by William, Catherine and Harry to de-stigmatise mental health. Legacy programmes include Mental Health at Work, launched in September 2018 to change the approach to workplace mental health in the United Kingdom, as well as Heads Up, launched in May 2019 in partnership with the Football Association, utilising football to affect the conversation surrounding mental health in adults. Later that month, the couple together with William's brother and sister-in-law launched Shout, the United Kingdom's first 24/7 text messaging service for those who suffer from mental issues. William later volunteered on the crisis helpline during the COVID-19 lockdowns to provide support via text message. He attributes his interest in mental health to his experiences as an air ambulance pilot, his work with the homeless, veterans' welfare, and his wife's anti-addiction advocacy. In March 2020, William and Catherine began supporting a new mental health initiative by the Public Health England agency amidst the coronavirus pandemic. In April 2020, the couple announced Our Frontline, an initiative providing mental health support to emergency medical workers. In September 2020 he established the Emergency Responders Senior Leaders Board, commissioned by the foundation to research the mental health and wellbeing of emergency responders, in partnership with King's College London and the Open University. In May 2021 and 2022, William and Catherine voiced the Mental Health Minute message, which was broadcast on every radio station in the United Kingdom on and asked people to help individuals around them that suffer from loneliness. In October 2022, to mark the World Mental Health Day, the couple took over Newsbeat and interviewed four guests on topics related to mental health. In September 2023 William unveiled two organizations that had partnered with the Duchy of Cornwall to raise better mental well-being and provide mental health services for all its tenants. In October 2023 to mark World Mental Health Day, he and Catherine took part in a forum for young people in Birmingham, alongside BBC Radio 1 and charity called The Mix, called Exploring our Emotional Worlds continuing their longstanding work to promote mental well-being. In September 2005, William became patron of Centrepoint, a charity that assists the homeless. In December 2009, as part of a Centrepoint-organised event, the prince spent the night in a sleeping bag near Blackfriars Bridge to raise awareness of the experiences of homeless youth. He opened their new facility, Apprenticeship House, in November 2019 to mark their 50th anniversary. William has been patron of homelessness charity The Passage since 2019 after first visiting the centre in 1993 with his mother. In October 2020, he wrote the introduction to the organisation's 40th-anniversary fundraising cookbook, discussing the importance of helping victims of homelessness during the COVID-19 pandemic. In December 2020, William volunteered at the charity to help prepare donation bags for homeless residents in emergency hotel accommodations and spoke with residents about their experiences. In 2022 and 2023, he was spotted selling copies of The Big Issue on the streets, copies of which are usually sold by homeless and unemployed people to collect money. In June 2023, William launched Homewards after two years of development, which aims to "finally end homelessness" in the United Kingdom. The five-year initiative aims to tackle homelessness in six pilot locations across the United Kingdom with an initial seed funding allocated for each area by the Royal Foundation, working with existing private sector and grassroots charity partners. The project focuses on early intervention and providing housing to families before other issues, such as abuse and joblessness, are addressed. In February 2024, William, in partnership with Cornish charity St Petrocs, announced plans for building 24 homes on Duchy of Cornwall land in Nansledan to provide temporary accommodation for people experiencing homelessness in the area. Future plans include building more than 400 social rented homes and a further 475 affordable dwellings in South East Faversham. William often plays polo to raise money for charity. He is a fan of football, and supports the English club Aston Villa. He became president of England's Football Association in May 2006 and vice-royal patron of the Welsh Rugby Union (WRU) in February 2007, supporting the Queen as patron. The same year, the WRU's decision to name the Prince William Cup drew criticism as some believed it would have been more appropriate to name it after Ray Gravell. In December 2016, William became patron of the WRU. In December 2010, William, alongside David Cameron, attended a meeting with FIFA vice-president Chung Mong-joon at which Chung suggested a vote-trading deal for the right to host the 2018 World Cup in England. The English delegation reported the suggestion to FIFA, considering it a violation of anti-collusion rules. In 2011, William, as president of the English FA, voted against Australia's 2022 FIFA bid and instead voted for South Korea, despite being Australia's future heir. In 2020, he voted against the joint Australia–New Zealand 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup bid and instead voted for Colombia. In February 2021, following an investigation into racism directed at Marcus Rashford, William released a statement as president of the FA, denouncing the "racist abuse... whether on the pitch, in the stands, or on social media" as "despicable" and stating that "we all have a responsibility" to create an environment of tolerance and accountability. In April 2021, William criticised the planned breakaway competition The Super League, adding that he "share[d] the concerns of fans about the proposed Super League and the damage it risks causing to the game we love." In July 2021, he condemned racist attacks against England football players following their loss at the UEFA Euro 2020 finale. In May 2007, William became patron of the English Schools' Swimming Association. In 2012, together with his wife Catherine and brother Harry, William launched Coach Core. The program was set up following the 2012 Olympics and provides apprenticeship opportunities for people who desire to pursue a career as a professional coach. In May 2020, he appeared in a BBC One Documentary titled Football, Prince William and Our Mental Health as a part of a campaign to promote men to discuss their mental issues using football as a common medium. Both William and Harry are enthusiastic motorcyclists; William owns a Ducati 1198 S Corse. In May 2014, William, like his father and grandfather, became president of the British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC). He took part in a bandy event in Stockholm in January 2018. In November 2022, William was criticised by Welsh football followers and Welsh actor Michael Sheen for holding the Prince of Wales title whilst having affiliations with the England national football team, particularly after he presented jerseys to the squad in advance of the 2022 FIFA World Cup in which both Wales and England were placed in the same Group B. William commented that he had supported the England football team from a very young age, but happily supported Welsh rugby union, of which he is patron, over England. In August 2023, he was criticised in segments of the press and social media for not attending 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup final in Australia as president of the FA. William has been one of the most popular members of the British royal family since his birth. Having lived a public life since birth, he was regarded as a "heartthrob" and eligible as a young adult, similar to his father. Ruth La Ferla of The New York Times contrasted William's "refined" and "polite" appeal to Leonardo DiCaprio's "bad-boy" popularity. Following his marriage, William's public image assumed a more "staid" and fatherly demeanour, having "settled into a stable domestic order." Journalist Anne McElvoy has described William's public personality as a "genial presence" with a "tougher side", alongside his mother's "inimitable style". Much of his royal duties focus on "big bet" projects, rather than "plaques and patronages". In 2016 William gave an interview stating his goal was "how do I make the royal family relevant in the next 20 years ... that's the challenge for me". In April 2011, Time magazine listed him as one of the most influential people in the world alongside his then-newlywed wife Catherine. In August 2023, Gallup, Inc. named him as the most popular public figure in the US after conducting a survey that asked for people's views on 15 prominent individuals. In December 2022 and September 2023, he was found to be the most popular member of the royal family by statistics and polling company YouGov. The death of William's mother while being chased by the paparazzi in August 1997 has since influenced his attitude towards the media. William and Catherine have often requested that, when off-duty, their privacy should be respected. In 2005 William spoke with ITV reporter Tom Bradby and concluded that it was likely that their voicemails were being accessed. An investigation under then Deputy Assistant Commissioner Peter Clarke concluded that the compromised voice mail accounts belonged to William's aides, including Jamie Lowther-Pinkerton, and not the prince himself. However, Clive Goodman later stated that he had hacked William's phone on 35 occasions. William later sued News Group Newspapers, publisher of News of the World and The Sun, which resulted in an out-of-court settlement in 2020. He and his brother Harry brought a claim privately through their mutual attorneys, but Harry later pursued his case separately with a new solicitor. In 2005, after his then-girlfriend Catherine Middleton was chased by the paparazzi on her way to a job interview, William consulted Middleton and her father and wrote a legal letter to newspapers requesting that they respect her privacy. As media attention increased around the time of Middleton's 25th birthday in January 2007, he issued a public statement mentioning that "the situation is proving unbearable for all those concerned." In October 2007, William issued a public statement via his press secretary complaining about the "aggressive pursuit" by "photographers on motorcycles, in vehicles and on foot" while the couple were leaving a London nightclub and later driving in his car. Following the statement, Daily Mail, Daily Mirror, and Daily Express all decided against using the paparazzi photos of the couple, but The Sun published photos taken before the couple's car had left. The statement prompted the Press Complaints Commission (PCC) to issue a warning, asking editors not to publish photographs which were taken through harassment. In April 2009, William's lawyers obtained an apology from The Daily Star after the tabloid had claimed he had "wrecked" a $2m plane during pilot training. In September 2012, the French edition of Closer and Italian gossip magazine Chi published photographs of Catherine sun-bathing topless while on holiday at the Château d'Autet in Provence. Analysts from The Times believed the photographs were taken from the D22 (Vaucluse) road half a kilometre from the pool – a distance that would require an 800-mm or a 1000-mm lens. In September 2012, William and Catherine filed a criminal complaint with the French prosecution department and launched a claim for civil damages at the Tribunal de Grande Instance de Nanterre. The following day the courts granted an injunction against Closer prohibiting further publication of the photographs and announced that a criminal investigation would be initiated. Under French law, punitive damages cannot be awarded but intrusions of privacy are a criminal offence. In September 2017, Closer was fined €100,000 and its editor Laurence Pieau and owner Ernesto Mauri were each fined €45,000. In October 2014, William and Catherine sent a legal letter to a freelance photographer who had put their son George and his nanny "under surveillance", asking the individual to stop "harassing and following" them. In August 2015, Kensington Palace published a letter detailing what it stated were the "dangerous" and invasive efforts of the media to get paparazzi pictures of Prince George and Princess Charlotte. Jason Knauf, communications secretary to the couple, wrote the letter to media standards organisations in various countries. In November 2016, William issued a statement supporting Prince Harry and his then-girlfriend, Meghan Markle, following their complaints about the press intrusion, stating that he "understands the situation concerning privacy and supports the need for Prince Harry to support those closest to him." In November 2018 during a visit to the BBC studios in central London, he publicly criticised the social media firms' approach to handling "misinformation and conspiracy" and added, "Their self-image is so grounded in their positive power for good that they seem unable to engage in constructive discussion about the social problems they are creating". In June 2022, a three-minute video of William confronting Terry Harris, a paparazzi photographer, was posted on Harris' YouTube channel. It was recorded by Harris in January 2021 and shows William arguing with Harris as the latter attempts to film William's family on a bike ride near Anmer Hall. Kensington Palace described the video as a breach of the family's privacy and asked for it to be removed from public websites. William and Catherine's lawyers also contacted the photographer, who claimed he was on public roads and had filmed the video after hearing about allegations that the couple had broken the "rule of six" as they toured a public attraction at Sandringham while William's uncle and aunt, then Earl and Countess of Wessex, and their children happened to be in the same spot. William has been a British prince since birth, and was known as "Prince William of Wales" until April 2011. On his wedding day, 29 April 2011, his grandmother Elizabeth II created him Duke of Cambridge, Earl of Strathearn and Baron Carrickfergus. The letters patent granting these titles were issued on 26 May that year. As the eldest son of the monarch, William automatically became Duke of Cornwall, Duke of Rothesay, Earl of Carrick, Baron of Renfrew, Lord of the Isles, and Prince and Great Steward of Scotland on the accession of his father on 8 September 2022. From 8 to 9 September, William was styled as "His Royal Highness the Duke of Cornwall and Cambridge". On 9 September, Charles announced the creation of William as Prince of Wales, the traditional title for the male heir apparent to the British monarch. William has since been known as "His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales", except in Scotland, where he is called "His Royal Highness the Duke of Rothesay" instead. The letters patent formally granting him this title and that of Earl of Chester were issued on 13 February 2023. William is a Royal Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter (KG), an Extra Knight of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle (KT), a member of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom (PC), and a Personal Aide-de-Camp (ADC) to the sovereign. The banners used by the Prince of Wales vary depending upon location. His personal standard is the Royal Standard of the United Kingdom differenced as in his arms with a label of three points Argent, and the escutcheon of the arms of the Principality of Wales in the centre. It is used outside Wales, Scotland, Cornwall, and Canada, and throughout the entire United Kingdom when the prince is acting in an official capacity associated with the United Kingdom Armed Forces. The personal flag for use in Wales is based upon the Royal Badge of Wales (the historic arms of the Kingdom of Gwynedd), which consist of four quadrants, the first and fourth with a red lion on a gold field, and the second and third with a gold lion on a red field. Superimposed is an escutcheon Vert bearing the single-arched coronet of the Prince of Wales. In Scotland, the personal banner used since 1974 is based upon three ancient Scottish titles: Duke of Rothesay (heir apparent to the King of Scots), High Steward of Scotland and Lord of the Isles. The flag is divided into four quadrants like the arms of the Chief of Clan Stewart of Appin; the first and fourth quadrants comprise a gold field with a blue and silver checkered band in the centre; the second and third quadrants display a black galley on a silver field. The arms are differenced from those of Appin by the addition of an inescutcheon bearing the tressured lion rampant of Scotland; defaced by a plain label of three points Azure to indicate the heir apparent. In Cornwall, the banner is the arms of the Duke of Cornwall: "Sable 15 bezants Or", that is, a black field bearing 15 gold coins. In Canada, a personal heraldic banner for the Prince of Wales was first issued in 2011, consisting of the shield of the Arms of Canada defaced with both a blue roundel of the Prince of Wales's feathers surrounded by a wreath of gold maple leaves, and a white label of three points. Banners of arms Prior to the accession of his father, William used a banner derived from his arms, for use outside of Scotland and Canada. There was a variation of this used when in Scotland. In 2011, the Canadian Heraldic Authority introduced a personal heraldic flag for the Duke of Cambridge's use in Canada. It is the Royal Arms of Canada in banner form defaced with a blue roundel surrounded with a wreath of gold maple leaves and shells within which is a depiction of a "W" surmounted by a coronet. Above the roundel is a white label of three points, charged with a red shell.) Standard for the Duke of Cambridge Standard for the Earl of Strathearn Former Canadian personal Standard for Prince William William's ancestry is royal and aristocratic. Patrilineally, he is a member of the House of Windsor and also descends from the House of Oldenburg, one of Europe's oldest royal houses. More specifically, he descends from the cadet branch known as the House of Glücksburg. Through his mother, William descends from the Earls Spencer – a cadet branch of the Spencer family descended from the Earls of Sunderland; the senior branch are now also Dukes of Marlborough; the Barons Fermoy; and more anciently from Henry FitzRoy, 1st Duke of Grafton, and Charles Lennox, 1st Duke of Richmond – two illegitimate sons of King Charles II. As king, William would be the first monarch since the death of Anne in 1714 to undisputedly descend from Charles I and the first to descend from Charles II. William descends matrilineally from Eliza Kewark, a housekeeper for his 18th-century ancestor Theodore Forbes – a Scottish merchant who worked for the East India Company in Surat. She is variously described in contemporary documents as "a dark-skinned native woman", "an Armenian woman from Bombay", and "Mrs. Forbesian". Genealogist William Addams Reitwiesner assumed Kewark was Armenian. In June 2013, it was reported that genealogical DNA tests on two of William's distant matrilineal cousins confirm Kewark was matrilineally of Indian descent. HRH Prince William, Duke of Cambridge, "Preface", in: Hurd, Douglas (2015). Elizabeth II: The Steadfast. Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-1419794-10. HRH Prince William, "Introduction", in: Butfield, Colin; Hughes, Jonnie (2021). Earthshot: How to Save Our Planet. John Murray. ISBN 978-1-5293886-26. HRH The Duke of Cambridge, "Foreword", in: Martell, Peter (2022). Flowers for Elephants: How a Conservation Movement in Kenya Offers Lessons for Us All. C. Hurst (Publishers) Limited. ISBN 978-1-7873869-38. HRH The Duke of Cambridge, "Foreword", in: GCHQ (2022). Puzzles for Spies. National Geographic Books. ISBN 978-0-2415799-09. HRH Prince William, "Foreword", in: Butfield, Colin; Hughes, Jonnie (2023). The Earthshot Prize: A Handbook for Dreamers and Thinkers: Solutions to Repair our Planet. Hachette Children's. ISBN 978-1-5263646-92. HRH William, Prince of Wales, "Foreword", in: Kent-Payne, Vaughan (2024). They Also Served: 200 People Who Trained At Sandhurst. Sandhurst Trust. Archived from the original on 4 February 2024. The Duke of Cambridge (7 September 2020). "An open letter written by The Duke of Cambridge to mark Air Ambulance Week 2020". The Royal Family. Archived from the original on 16 August 2023. Prince William; Michael Bloomberg (28 September 2021). "We're in a race to save Earth from climate change". USA Today. Archived from the original on 16 August 2023. The Duke of Cambridge (20 June 2022). "Prince William: 'Why I wanted to work with The Big Issue'". The Big Issue. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Royal William, a German red rose named after Prince William shortly after his birth List of covers of Time magazine (1990s), (2010s) As a member of the royal family entitled to be called His Royal Highness, William does not normally use a surname. He has used both Mountbatten-Windsor, and – at university and in his military career – Wales. The middle name Louis is pronounced /ˈluːi/. William had six godparents: former King Constantine II of Greece (his paternal second cousin once removed); Princess Alexandra, The Honourable Mrs Ogilvy (his paternal first cousin twice removed); the Duchess of Westminster; Lady Susan Hussey; Lord Romsey (his paternal second cousin once removed); and Sir Laurens van der Post. It was previously known as "The Royal Foundation of The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and Prince Harry" and then "The Royal Foundation of The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge" before being renamed "The Royal Foundation of The Prince and Princess of Wales" in September 2022. Lichfield, John (19 September 2012). "William and Kate win legal battle – but lose war to keep topless photos under wraps". The Independent. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 11 January 2015. "Duke of Cambridge to deploy to Falklands". Ministry of Defence. 10 November 2011. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 11 November 2011. "Prince William's his name". The Evening News. AP. 28 July 1982. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 23 July 2013. "The Duke of Cambridge – Biography". Office of the Prince of Wales. Archived from the original on 23 April 2015. Retrieved 6 May 2015. "No. 49027". The London Gazette. 21 June 1982. p. 8215. Dallas, Rita (5 August 1982). "The Royal Christening". The Washington Post. Retrieved 2 November 2023. "William baptized". The Palm Beach Post. AP. 5 August 1982. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2013. "Princess Diana enters hospital in early labor". Youngstown Vindicator. AP. 21 June 1982. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 21 July 2013. Carr, Flora (15 November 2020). "Prince Charles and Princess Diana's Australia tour – Everything you need to know about what really happened". RadioTimes. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 12 December 2020. Cobiella, Kelly (6 April 2014). "Baby's first tour: Prince George travels Down Under with William and Kate". CBS News. Archived from the original on 27 December 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2022. "Growing Up Royal". Time. 25 April 1988. Archived from the original on 31 March 2005. Retrieved 4 June 2009. Toneli, Lucia (2 October 2021). "You Could Be Prince Charles and Camilla's Neighbor for $10.1 Million". Town & Country. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021. "The young royals: Prince William". BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021. Taylor, Elsie (30 October 2019). "Cath, wombat, and cabbage: the nicknames of the British royal family". Vogue. Archived from the original on 23 August 2018. Retrieved 24 November 2020. Sommerlad, Joe (5 January 2023). "Prince Harry's new book reveals brothers' childhood nicknames". The Independent. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2023. Lauer, Matt (12 June 2007). "In honor of Diana". NBC News. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2020. But when we went to Australia with our parents, and the wombat, you know, that's the local animal. So I just basically got called that. Not because I look like a wombat. "Prince William Biography". People. Archived from the original on 21 August 2016. Retrieved 15 October 2008. Perry, Simon. "Inside the Moment Prince William and Prince Harry's Personalities Flipped as Kids". People. Archived from the original on 31 January 2023. Retrieved 30 January 2023. Brown, Tina (5 April 2022). "How Princess Diana's Dance With the Media Impacted William and Harry". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 8 June 2023. Retrieved 6 April 2022. "Special Church Services to Remember Diana". BBC News. Archived from the original on 1 March 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2023. It was here on St David's day in 1991 that she and Prince Charles brought the eight year old Prince William to attend his first public engagement. "When princes Harry and William visited Canada with their parents". CBC. Archived from the original on 21 December 2020. Retrieved 16 December 2020. "'What about Harry?' When 2 teenage princes and their dad visited Canada". CBC. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2020. "Timeline: How Diana died". BBC News. 14 December 2006. Archived from the original on 23 January 2008. Retrieved 15 October 2008. Brandreth, Gyles (2004). Philip and Elizabeth: Portrait of a Marriage. London: Century. p. 359. ISBN 978-0-71-266103-4. "BBC On This Day – 6–1997: Diana's funeral watched by millions". BBC News. 6 September 1997. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 26 March 2009. "Prince William on Diana, Princess of Wales". GQ. 29 May 2017. Archived from the original on 6 June 2019. Retrieved 13 December 2020. "Prince Harry and Meghan: Where do they get their money?". BBC News. 20 January 2020. Archived from the original on 6 April 2020. Retrieved 5 April 2020. "What will Prince Harry and Prince William inherit from Princess Diana?". The Telegraph. 1 September 2014. Archived from the original on 19 May 2020. Retrieved 5 April 2020. Richard Ford (2 April 2002). "Princes inherit as royal big spender leaves £60m". The Times. p. 8. Archived from the original on 7 February 2024. Retrieved 5 April 2020 – via The Times Digital Archive. "Wetherby Pre-Preparatory School". London Pre-Prep. Archived from the original on 7 August 2013. Retrieved 23 July 2013. Stratton, Allegra (26 October 2009). "Former royal tutor Rory Stewart selected for safe Tory seat". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 May 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2016. "Prince William gives an interview at the start of his university career". 22 September 2001. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. "What is it like at Eton College?". BBC News. 4 July 2005. Archived from the original on 26 April 2009. Retrieved 11 October 2009. Bates, Stephen (18 August 2000). "William makes the grade". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 December 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2016. Barber, Richard (2004). The Story of Ludgrove. Oxford: Guidon Publishing. pp. 244–245. ISBN 978-0-95-436172-3. "The Prince of Wales – Interests". The Prince of Wales. Archived from the original on 16 June 2008. Retrieved 15 October 2008. Lacey, Robert. "How Queen Elizabeth's Sunday Lunches with Prince William Molded Him as a Future King". People. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2023. Burchfield, Rachel (14 May 2022). "Prince George Only Recently Learned His Destiny as Future King". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on 10 February 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2023. "Prince William marks the end of the first term of his third university year with an interview". The Prince of Wales. 14 December 2003. Archived from the original on 25 October 2008. Retrieved 31 May 2008. Barcelona, Ainhoa (6 April 2022). "17 times the royals have sported injuries". Hello!. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 3 September 2022. "Rugged prince scores PR triumph". BBC News. 11 December 2000. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017. Retrieved 11 January 2015. Prince of Wales.gov personalprofiles Archived 2 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine & royal.gov The Duke of Cambridge Archived 9 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 8 February 2012 "Prince William Celebrates 21st Birthday With African-Themed Party". Fox News. 21 June 2003. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Summerskill, Ben (23 September 2001). "Welcome to Will's new world". The Observer. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2008. Howie, Michael (24 June 2005). "William Wales M.A. collects his degree". The Scotsman. Archived from the original on 14 June 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2008. Gumuchian, Marie-Louise (14 April 2011). "Witness - Studying at St Andrews with the royal couple". Reuters. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023. Retrieved 26 April 2022. "Prince William awaits finals". The Guardian. 10 June 2005. Archived from the original on 13 September 2022. Retrieved 30 April 2021. "Prince William graduates from university". The Telegraph. 23 June 2005. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 27 June 2019. Price Brown, Sarah (24 June 2005). "Prince William Gets His Degree". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 28 June 2019. Retrieved 27 June 2019. Dooney, Emma (2 September 2022). "Prince William's secret name to protect royal identity revealed". Woman and Home. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 29 November 2023. "The Prince of Wales: Prince William: Biography: Growing Up". The Prince of Wales. Archived from the original on 15 June 2008. Retrieved 16 October 2008. "Prince William graduates from university". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 11 February 2023. "Australian leaders dismiss the idea of Prince William as governor-general". International Herald Tribune. Archived from the original on 1 July 2007. Retrieved 15 October 2008. Nikkhah, Roya (10 February 2011). "Mentor helps Kate Middleton prepare for Royal life". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 28 November 2012. Retrieved 23 July 2013. "Prince William's royal magic captures the crowds". The New Zealand Herald. New Zealand Press Association. 18 January 2010. Archived from the original on 22 January 2012. Retrieved 19 January 2010. Bates, Stephen (17 January 2010). "Prince William arrives in Auckland for official visit to New Zealand". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 February 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Bates, Stephen (22 January 2010). "How Prince William won over Australia and New Zealand". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 10 June 2021. Manhire, Toby (17 March 2011). "Prince William tours Christchurch earthquake damage". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 23 July 2013. Booker, Jarrod (18 March 2011). "Service inspires weary Cantabrians". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 2 November 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2011. Mclean, Tamara (19 March 2011). "Prince William heads to Queensland". Stuff.co.nz. Archived from the original on 22 March 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2011. "Christchurch quake memorial service: As it happened". TVNZ One News. 18 March 2011. Archived from the original on 21 January 2012. Retrieved 25 December 2011. Victoria Arbiter (8 January 2014). "Opinion: Why Prince William is right to go back to school". CNN. Archived from the original on 24 April 2016. Retrieved 14 April 2016. "Prince William begins agriculture course at Cambridge". BBC News. 7 January 2014. Archived from the original on 18 October 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Rayner, Gordon (30 December 2013). "Duke of Cambridge to study agriculture at Cambridge University". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 26 April 2018. Retrieved 5 April 2018. Davies, Caroline (22 October 2005). "Prince William to join his brother at Sandhurst". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 February 2012. Retrieved 22 May 2010. "William joining Harry's regiment". BBC News. 21 September 2006. Archived from the original on 7 January 2009. Retrieved 17 November 2010. "William begins new life in Army". BBC News. 8 January 2007. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 27 June 2019. Balla, Reemul (11 April 2023). "'They must do their duty': The Queen wanted both Prince William and Prince Harry to serve on frontline, royal documentary reveals". Sky News. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 11 April 2023. Nobel, Carmen (18 April 2019). "Prince Harry in Afghanistan: Miguel Head shares the story of a historic media blackout". The Journalist's Resource. Archived from the original on 31 August 2023. Retrieved 31 August 2023. "Prince William ready for Search and Rescue role". meeja.com.au. 16 September 2008. Archived from the original on 19 October 2008. Retrieved 16 September 2008. Pierce, Andrew (13 January 2009). "Prince William starts as a search and rescue helicopter pilot". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 April 2010. Retrieved 18 January 2009. Staff (12 April 2008). "Kate watches William get his wings". Deutsche Presse-Agentur. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2013 – via The Sydney Morning Herald. "Prince William awarded RAF wings". BBC News. 11 April 2008. Archived from the original on 26 July 2008. Retrieved 2 July 2008. "William visits Afghanistan troops". BBC News. 30 April 2008. Archived from the original on 21 May 2008. Retrieved 30 August 2008. "William's Navy posting revealed". BBC News. 31 May 2008. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009. Retrieved 31 May 2008. Norton-Taylor, Richard (2 July 2008). "Prince William's ship in £40m drugs rai". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 11 November 2020. "Prince William recalls the time he took part in an R825 million drugs bust". Channel24. 11 November 2020. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 11 November 2020. Bonnett, Tom (15 January 2010). "Royal Heir Force: Prince's Career Takes Off". Sky News. Archived from the original on 7 February 2024. Retrieved 16 January 2010. "Prince William starts RAF rescue training on Anglesey". BBC News. 26 January 2010. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 26 January 2010. Davies, Caroline (20 November 2012). "Prince William photos offer insight into RAF working life". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 November 2023. Retrieved 5 November 2023. "The Tatler List – Duke of Cambridge". Tatler. Archived from the original on 5 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. "Co-pilot Prince William rescues man from oil rig". BBC News. 5 October 2010. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 17 January 2015. Bingham, John; Bunyan, Nigel (27 November 2011). "Prince William spearheads rescue for stricken Russian sailors". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 November 2014. Retrieved 11 January 2015. "Prince William to deploy to Falkland Islands". CTV News. 11 November 2011. Archived from the original on 11 July 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2011. "Prince William arrives in the Falkland Islands". The Guardian. Press Association. 3 February 2012. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 11 February 2012. "Argentina condemns Prince William Falklands posting". BBC News. 11 November 2011. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 5 January 2012. Goñi, Uki (1 February 2012). "Argentina criticises Prince William's tour of duty of Falkland Islands". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 11 February 2012. "Prince William to command search and rescue missions". BBC News. 7 June 2012. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. Withnall, Adam (12 September 2013). "Prince William completes last shift as RAF pilot to take up full-time job of being royal". The Independent. Archived from the original on 11 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. "Prince William to swap armed forces for royal and charity duties". BBC News. 12 September 2013. Archived from the original on 12 September 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2013. Malik, Shiv (12 September 2013). "Prince William leaves RAF to pursue charity work". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 March 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2023. "Prince William joins Battle of Britain Memorial Flight commemorations". BBC News. 11 July 2017. Archived from the original on 16 March 2023. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Prince William starts new job as air ambulance pilot". The Guardian. 13 July 2015. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 16 December 2016. "Prince William to join East Anglian Air Ambulance". BBC News. 7 August 2014. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 7 August 2014. Rosa McMahon. "Prince William starts training for East Anglian Air Ambulance job at Norwich airport". Eastern Daily Press. Archived from the original on 1 April 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2015. "Inside the trauma team where Prince William is a pilot". BBC News. 20 September 2016. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 13 December 2020. Murray, Tom. "Prince William says witnessing 'so much death' as an air ambulance pilot made him see the world as a 'darker place'". Insider. Archived from the original on 7 February 2024. Retrieved 19 February 2021. Hunt, Peter (27 July 2017). "Prince William ready to be full-time royal". BBC News. Archived from the original on 3 May 2021. Retrieved 3 May 2021. "Prince William pilots last East Anglian Air Ambulance shift". BBC News. 27 July 2017. Archived from the original on 1 March 2018. Retrieved 2 March 2018. "The Duke of Cambridge becomes Patron of our charity". London's Air Ambulance Charity. 11 March 2020. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Prince William gives up a patch of Kensington Palace lawn for Air Ambulance use". Tatler. 4 May 2020. Archived from the original on 25 October 2020. Retrieved 13 December 2020. Mackelden, Amy (7 September 2020). "Prince William Shares His "Profound Respect" for Air Ambulance Workers in a Personal Letter". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on 18 March 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2021. "An open letter written by The Duke of Cambridge to mark Air Ambulance Week 2020". The Royal Family. 7 September 2020. Archived from the original on 4 March 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2021. Perry, Simon; Petit, Stephanie (28 February 2023). "Kate Middleton and Prince William Visit Wales Ahead of a Special Feast Day for the Country". People. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. "Prince William named royal patron of the Wales Air Ambulance charity". Nation.Cymru. 28 February 2023. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. Cramb, Auslan (25 February 2011). "Prince William and Kate Middleton return to St Andrews University for anniversary celebrations". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 July 2015. Retrieved 9 August 2015. In their first year, they lived a few doors apart at St Salvator's hall... Ward, Vicky. "Will's Cup of Tea". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 1 September 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023. "Kate Middleton's transparent dress sparks global interest at auction". The Telegraph. 12 March 2011. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Rayner, Gordon (17 November 2010). "Royal wedding: schoolgirl dream comes true for Kate Middleton, the 'princess in waiting'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Peskoe, Ashley (12 April 2011). "The Start of Prince William and Kate Middleton's Love Story". ABC News. Archived from the original on 17 August 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2015. Jobson, Robert (23 October 2013). "Profiles: Prince George's godparents". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 27 January 2016. Retrieved 17 January 2016. "Wills and the Real Girl". Vanity Fair. 4 November 2010. Archived from the original on 9 February 2015. Retrieved 30 December 2020. Mackelden, Amy (23 September 2018). "Why Kate Middleton and Prince William Broke Up Before They Got Married". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on 26 August 2022. Retrieved 26 August 2022. "Prince William splits from Kate". BBC News. 14 April 2007. Archived from the original on 13 November 2010. Retrieved 7 May 2010. "Prince William, girlfriend end their relationship". CTV News. 14 April 2007. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 16 October 2008. "William graduates from Sandhurst". BBC News. 15 December 2006. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016. Retrieved 28 October 2015. "Royal wedding: The Kate Middleton story". BBC News. 16 November 2010. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016. Retrieved 28 October 2015. "'Paparazzi chase' concerns prince". BBC News. 5 October 2007. Archived from the original on 12 December 2009. Retrieved 7 May 2010. "William made Knight of the Garter". BBC News. 16 June 2008. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 21 November 2020. "Prince William and Catherine Middleton: The Royal Wedding of 2011". Britannica. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 21 November 2020. "Prince William and Kate revisit former home of Anglesey". BBC News. 8 May 2019. Archived from the original on 12 August 2021. Retrieved 23 November 2020. "First look inside the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge's Anglesey home". The Telegraph. 23 September 2013. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. "His Royal Highness Prince William of Wales and Miss Catherine Middleton are engaged to be married". The Royal Family (Press release). 16 November 2010. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016. Retrieved 3 October 2016. Petit, Stephanie (28 April 2023). "Kate Middleton Reveals She and Princess Diana Share the Same Ring Size While Talking About Engagement Ring". People. Archived from the original on 21 June 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2023. "Crowds cheer newly-wed couple". BBC News. 29 April 2011. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2011. "Royal wedding: William and Kate marry at Abbey". BBC News. 29 April 2011. Archived from the original on 29 December 2017. Retrieved 10 February 2023. "2 billion tune into Royal Wedding". News.com.au. 1 May 2011. Archived from the original on 2 May 2011. Retrieved 1 May 2011. "'Revealed: Royal Wedding TV audience closer to 300m than 2bn (because sport, not royalty, reigns)', by Nick Harris at". Sporting Intelligence. 8 May 2011. Archived from the original on 22 May 2011. Retrieved 1 July 2011. de Moraes, Lisa (28 April 2011). "The TV Column: Counting royal wedding watchers .?.?. before the wedding?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 2 September 2013. "The Prince of Wales". The Royal Family. Archived from the original on 8 September 2022. Retrieved 10 February 2023. Foster, Max (26 June 2014). "Royal palace upgrade for William, Catherine and George costs $7.6 million". CNN. Archived from the original on 12 April 2021. Retrieved 26 June 2014. "New family-size house for Duke and Duchess of Cambridge in his childhood home". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Nicholl, Katie (April 2015). "William and Kate Will Move into Anmer Hall Before the New Baby Arrives". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 31 May 2021. "Kate and William make media plea for privacy during stay in Norfolk". The Guardian. 7 May 2015. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 21 November 2020. Witchell, Nicholas (22 August 2022). "Adelaide Cottage: William and Kate to move to cottage on Windsor estate". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 August 2022. Retrieved 22 August 2022. Taylor, Elise (22 August 2022). "The Rich—And Scandalous—History of Adelaide Cottage, Prince William and Kate Middleton's New Home". Vogue. Archived from the original on 1 March 2023. Retrieved 31 January 2023. "Kate Middleton and Prince William Are Officially Moving to London This Fall". Vanity Fair. 20 January 2017. Archived from the original on 24 September 2021. Retrieved 1 June 2021. "Duchess of Cambridge pregnant". BBC News. 3 December 2012. Archived from the original on 3 December 2012. Retrieved 3 December 2012. Saul, Heather (24 July 2013). "Royal baby: The prince meets his people in world media frenzy". The Independent. Archived from the original on 11 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. "Royal baby: Kate gives birth to boy". BBC News. 22 July 2013. Archived from the original on 23 July 2013. Retrieved 22 July 2013. "Royal baby: Prince William and Kate expecting second child". BBC News. 8 September 2014. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Royal baby: Duchess of Cambridge gives birth to daughter". BBC News. 2 May 2015. Archived from the original on 2 May 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2015. "Royal baby: Duchess of Cambridge expecting third child". BBC News. 4 September 2017. Archived from the original on 21 May 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018. "Royal baby: Duchess of Cambridge gives birth to boy". BBC News. 23 April 2018. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Pasquini, Maria (22 November 2020). "Prince William and Kate Middleton Mourn the Death of Family Dog Lupo: 'We Will Miss Him So Much'". People. Archived from the original on 22 November 2020. Retrieved 22 November 2020. Petit, Stephanie; Hill, Erin (6 July 2022). "Kate Middleton and Prince William Bring Their Dog Orla to Charity Polo Match!". People. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. "Announcement of titles". The Royal Family. 29 April 2011. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2011. "Kate and William become Duke and Duchess of Cambridge". BBC News. 29 April 2011. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2011. Beckford, Martin (29 April 2011). "Prince William and Kate Middleton's new titles revealed". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2 May 2011. Retrieved 3 June 2011. Campion-Smith, Bruce (16 February 2011). "Royal newlyweds are coming to Canada, but not Toronto". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 19 February 2011. Retrieved 16 February 2011. "Queen calls Canada 'example to the world'". CBC. 1 July 2010. Archived from the original on 2 July 2010. Retrieved 16 February 2011. Proudfoot, Shannon; Marianne White; Anne Sutherland (3 July 2011). "Prince Charming? Will woos Quebec". Windsor Star. Archived from the original on 2 April 2012. Retrieved 4 July 2011. Smith, Joanna (29 June 2011). "Younger Canadians royally indifferent to tour, poll shows". The Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2011. Taber, Jane (1 July 2011). "'Kate-mania' draws huge crowd to Canada Day in Ottawa". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 3 July 2011. Retrieved 2 July 2011. Valpy, Michael. "Michael Valpy: So long, young royals, you did good". CBC. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 10 June 2021. "Royals made ambassadors of London 2012 Olympic Games". The Guardian. 1 December 2011. Archived from the original on 30 September 2013. Retrieved 13 December 2012. Singh, Anita (15 December 2011). "Jubilee: royal trip to paradise for Duke and Duchess". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016. Retrieved 28 October 2015. "Prince William hosts his first investiture". BBC News. Archived from the original on 18 March 2021. Retrieved 12 December 2020. "Royal visit: Prince William and Kate arrive in Sydney with Prince George for 10-day Australian tour". ABC News. 15 April 2014. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 21 November 2020. Manhire, Toby (7 April 2014). "William, Kate and Prince George arrive in New Zealand for 10-day royal tour". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. "Prince William and Kate visit poppy moat Tower of London WWI display". Evening Standard. 5 August 2014. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. "Prince William holds first talks with President Obama". BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 August 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Gambino, Lauren (8 December 2014). "This article is more than 8 years old Prince William and Kate arrive in New York for three-day US visit". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 September 2021. Retrieved 28 February 2023. "Prince William arrives in Japan for four-day visit". BBC News. 26 February 2015. Archived from the original on 26 February 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2020. "The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge: Spring 2016 visit announcement". The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge. 13 November 2015. Archived from the original on 15 October 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2018. "Prince William and Kate visit India – in pictures". The Guardian. 10 April 2016. Archived from the original on 21 April 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2020. Hume, Tim (14 April 2016). "Duke and Duchess of Cambridge meet 'William and Kate of the Himalayas'". CNN. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 21 November 2020. "Prince William arrives in China and invites President Xi for state visit". The Telegraph. Reuters. 2 March 2015. Archived from the original on 25 December 2015. Retrieved 25 December 2015. "Britain's Prince William Handles His China Visit With Polish". Time. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. "Prince William in Beijing Proves Defter Diplomat Than Dad on China". NBC. 2 March 2015. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. Davies, Caroline (20 April 2016). "Prince William rejects tag of work-shy royal: 'I take duty seriously'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. Rodriguez, Cecilia (18 March 2017). "Kate Middleton And Prince William Charm Paris: Best Photos Of A Glamorous Diplomatic Trip". Forbes. Archived from the original on 1 March 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. Furness, Hannah (17 July 2017). "Prince George takes some gentle coaxing from his father as royals arrive in Poland for 'Brexit diplomacy' tour". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 1 March 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. Rodriguez, Cecilia (21 July 2017). "Kate Middleton, Prince William And Kids In Germany: The Best Photos From Their Charm And Fashion Diplomacy". Forbes. Archived from the original on 1 March 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. Duboff, Josh (31 July 2017). "Kate Middleton Repeats an Iconic Look in Belgium". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 1 March 2018. Gajanan, Mahita (30 January 2018). "See Prince William and Kate Middleton With the Swedish Royal Family". Time. Archived from the original on 30 January 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2018. "Royals to fly the flag amid Brexit talks". BBC News. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 13 December 2020. "William and Kate to visit Paris as part of Brexit charm offensive". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 13 December 2020. "Duke and Duchess of Cambridge to visit Germany and Poland". BBC News. 3 March 2017. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 13 December 2020. "Prince William Lands in Jordan for 'Historic' Middle East Trip". The New York Times. 24 June 2018. Archived from the original on 23 July 2021. Retrieved 19 December 2020. Heller, Jeffrey (28 June 2018). "UK's Prince William visits Jerusalem holy sites, great-grandmother's tomb". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 June 2018. Retrieved 29 June 2018. Furness, Hannah (29 June 2019). "Duke and Duchess of Cambridge defy security fears with plan to retrace Diana's footsteps during royal tour of Pakistan". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 29 June 2019. Retrieved 29 June 2019. "Covid-19: Prince William 'tested positive in April'". BBC News. 1 November 2020. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2020. Ward, Victoria (2 November 2020). "Prince William was 'very ill' with Covid, sources suggest, amid questions about decision not to go public". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2020. Nicholl, Katie; Vanderhoof, Erin (2 November 2020). "Prince William's Coronavirus Diagnosis Was 'No Secret' Among the Royal Family". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 18 October 2021. Retrieved 14 October 2021. "Covid: William and Kate plan train tour to thank key workers". BBC News. 6 December 2020. Archived from the original on 6 December 2020. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Perry, Simon. "Kate Middleton and Prince William Kick Off Final Day of Royal Train Tour with Trip to a Castle!". People. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 8 December 2020. "The Royal Train Tour". The Royal Family. 4 December 2020. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Davies, Caroline; Elgot, Jessica (8 December 2020). "Lukewarm welcome for William and Kate in royal tour of Scotland and Wales". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2020. Neilan, Catherine (8 December 2020). "UK drops law-breaking clauses from Internal Market Bill after reaching new Brexit agreement with EU". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "In pictures: Prince William and Kate visit Scotland". BBC News. 27 May 2021. Archived from the original on 25 May 2021. Retrieved 28 May 2021. Holden, Michael (12 June 2021). "Are you supposed to be enjoying yourselves? Queen Elizabeth asks G7". Reuters. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 13 June 2021. Nicholl, Katie (11 June 2021). "Prince William and Kate Make Royal History at the G7". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 12 June 2021. Retrieved 13 June 2021. "Queen hosts reception at Eden Project with Royal family and G7 leaders", Cornwall Live, 11 June 2021, archived from the original on 13 June 2021, retrieved 13 June 2021 "Caribbean tour: Prince William says future is for the people to decide". BBC News. 27 March 2022. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 27 March 2022. White, Nadine (23 March 2022). "William and Kate's royal visit to the Caribbean is offensively tone deaf". The Independent. Archived from the original on 27 March 2022. Retrieved 28 March 2022. White, Nadine (26 March 2022). "Belize signals intention to remove Queen as head of state following royal visit". The Independent. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 27 March 2022. "Prince William says royal family 'supports with pride and respect' any future decision made by Queen's overseas realms". Hello!. 26 March 2022. Archived from the original on 26 March 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2022. "UK's Prince William thanks 'Windrush' generation as memorial unveiled". Reuters. 22 June 2022. Archived from the original on 23 June 2022. Retrieved 23 June 2022. White, Nadine (22 June 2022). "Prince William tells Windrush victims 'racism remains all-too familiar for Black people in Britain'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 22 June 2022. Retrieved 23 June 2022. Davies, Caroline (10 May 2022). "Queen remains 'very much in charge' even as Charles makes speech". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 June 2023. Retrieved 10 May 2022. "William and Kate named Prince and Princess of Wales by the King". BBC News. 9 September 2022. Archived from the original on 9 September 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. Clear, Stephen. "Prince of Wales: why William inheriting the title from Charles has sparked a debate". The Conversation. Archived from the original on 22 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "The Royal Family name". The Royal Family. 3 April 2016. Archived from the original on 30 May 2016. Retrieved 24 September 2022. John, Lucy (17 September 2022). "Bearded man heckles King Charles in Cardiff over the cost of the monarchy". WalesOnline. Archived from the original on 5 October 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2022. "Watch: King Charles's first speech in full". BBC News. 9 September 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. "'Westminster could learn something from the Royals about how to treat Wales'". WalesOnline. 30 October 2022. Archived from the original on 17 November 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2022. "Prince of Wales has no plans for investiture, Kensington Palace confirms". BBC News. 16 November 2022. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2022. Kirkpatrick, Emily (30 December 2021). "Report: Prince William Is Looking Into Ways to Use His Family's Properties to Address Homelessness". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. "What is the Duchy of Cornwall and how much will Prince William earn from it?". ITV. 12 September 2022. Archived from the original on 1 December 2022. Retrieved 8 January 2023. "Prince and Princess of Wales visit nation for first time". BBC News. 28 September 2022. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Buarck, Emily (16 November 2022). "Prince William Visits the Welsh Parliament". Town & Country. Archived from the original on 7 February 2023. Retrieved 7 February 2023. Perry, Simon (9 February 2023). "Kate Middleton and Prince William Make First Official Visit to Cornwall Since Taking on New Titles". People. Archived from the original on 13 March 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2023. Perry, Simon (22 March 2023). "Prince William Makes Surprise Poland Trip to 'Look into the Eyes' of Those Helping Ukraine and 'Say Thank You'". People. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 23 March 2023. Perry, Simon (23 March 2023). "Prince William Spends Time With Ukrainian Refugees in Poland After Somber Tribute to War Dead". People. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 23 March 2023. Elston, Laura (11 October 2023). "King, William and Kate condemn 'horrors' of Hamas' attacks on Israel". The Independent. Archived from the original on 17 October 2023. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Coughlan, Sean (20 February 2024). "Prince William: 'Too many killed' in Israel-Gaza war". BBC News. Archived from the original on 20 February 2024. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Perry, Simon (20 February 2024). "Prince William Says He's Clinging to Hope of 'Brighter Future' in Middle East as He Visits British Red Cross". People. Archived from the original on 20 February 2024. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Caughlan, Sean (27 February 2024). "Prince William pulls out of memorial service due to 'personal matter'". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 February 2024. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Perry, Simon (29 February 2024). "Prince William Says He and Kate Are 'Extremely Concerned' About Antisemitism Rise During Synagogue Visit". People. Archived from the original on 29 February 2024. Retrieved 29 February 2024. "HRH The Prince of Wales – Prince William – Charities and Patronages". The Royal Family. Archived from the original on 4 February 2009. Retrieved 29 April 2011. "Prince William – At Work – Charities and Patronages". The Prince of Wales. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2011. "Our President". The Royal Marsden. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 25 May 2022. "What is the Concert for Diana?". BBC News. 13 August 2015. Archived from the original on 17 October 2015. Retrieved 12 December 2020. "Princes embark on Africa charity bike ride". Reuters. 18 October 2008. Archived from the original on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 4 July 2022. "Prince William to become Patron of 100 Women in Hedge Funds' philanthropic initiatives". Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. Retrieved 13 November 2011. "Prince William Appointed Academy President". BAFTA. 21 February 2010. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 5 March 2011. "The Prince William & Miss Catherine Middleton Charitable Gift Fund". Royal Wedding Charity Fund. Archived from the original on 18 March 2011. Retrieved 4 February 2012.;Ward, Victoria (16 March 2011). "William and Kate ask for charity donations in lieu of wedding gifts – Prince William and Kate Middleton have asked wedding guests and well wishers to donate to their own special charitable fund rather than give them presents, St James's Palace has announced". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 October 2013. Retrieved 23 July 2013.;Holden, Michael (16 March 2011). "William and Catherine set up royal wedding charity fund". Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 July 2013. Retrieved 23 July 2013.;"William and Catherine's gift to Christchurch". Fairfax NZ News. 17 March 2011. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2013 – via stuff.co.nz.;Garton, Christie (29 April 2011). "No wedding gifts, please: William and Catherine request charity donations instead". USA Today. Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2013. "Privacy Policy The Royal Foundation". Archived from the original on 13 August 2018. Retrieved 18 September 2019. "History". Royal Foundation. Archived from the original on 28 March 2023. Retrieved 28 March 2023. "LGBT Awards: Prince William honoured for supporting community". BBC News. 13 May 2017. Archived from the original on 14 December 2018. Retrieved 14 December 2020. Siddique, Haroon (15 June 2016). "Prince William appears on cover of gay magazine Attitude". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 September 2021. Retrieved 4 September 2021. Wylie, Catherine. "William jokes he is 'underdressed' in film for Pride Month". The Independent. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 30 June 2023. Stacey, Danielle (26 March 2020). "Prince William receives good news amid COVID-19 crisis". Hello!. Archived from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020. "Coronavirus Appeal Update" (PDF). National Emergencies Trust. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 March 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2021. Nolasco, Stephanie (13 April 2020). "Prince William says Britain 'at its best when faced with a crisis' amid coronavirus pandemic". Fox News. Archived from the original on 13 April 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020. "The Big Night In". Blackadder. 23 April 2020. Archived from the original on 22 April 2020. Retrieved 23 April 2020. Perry, Simon. "Kate Middleton and Prince William Arrive in Scotland for First Stop of British Tour on Royal Train". People. Archived from the original on 7 December 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020. "Covid-19: Prince William visits King's Lynn vaccination centre". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 February 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2021. "Covid-19: Prince William and Kate urge people to get vaccine". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2 March 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2021. "Prince William receives first Covid vaccine dose". BBC News. 20 May 2021. Archived from the original on 20 May 2021. Retrieved 20 May 2021. Crane, Emily (3 September 2021). "Prince William reportedly helped Afghan officer, family escape Kabul". Fox News. Archived from the original on 3 September 2021. Retrieved 4 September 2021. Furness, Hannah (3 March 2022). "The Queen makes 'generous' private donation to Ukraine fund as Royal family shows its support". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 5 March 2022. Retrieved 5 March 2022. Adams, Charley; McGarvey, Emily (9 February 2023). "Turkey-Syria earthquake: King thanked for 'generous' donation to DEC disaster appeal". BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 February 2023. Retrieved 9 February 2023. Henni, Janine (25 July 2023). "Prince William Announces New Patronage at Hospital Where George, Charlotte and Louis Were Born". People. Archived from the original on 28 July 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "About Us". Tusk Trust. Archived from the original on 8 August 2018. Retrieved 7 August 2018. "Cycle of Life: News". Cycle of Life. 2007. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2011. "Prince William Bids Bon Voyage to Fundraising Cross-Africa Cyclists". Hello!. 1 April 2008. Archived from the original on 23 November 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2021. Perry, Simon (22 November 2021). "Prince William Steps Out to Honor Conservation Heroes as He Continues Fight Against Climate Change". People. Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 22 November 2021. "Prince William and Prince Harry to visit Botswana, Lesotho and South Africa". The Royal Family. 10 May 2010. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 13 December 2020. "Royal Patronage". Fields in Trust. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 27 November 2015. "UfW Taskforces". Royal Foundation. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 17 October 2020. "Prince William 'calls for Buckingham Palace ivory to be destroyed'". Press Association. 17 February 2014. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 4 April 2023 – via The Guardian. Daunton, Nichola (24 November 2021). "Why Prince William is wrong to blame habitat loss on population growth in Africa". Euronews. Archived from the original on 25 November 2021. Retrieved 26 November 2021. "Prince William and the Royal Foundation Launch £50 Million Earthshot Prize". The Royal Foundation. 7 October 2020. Archived from the original on 19 October 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "TED". Protecting the natural environment for future generations is one of Prince William's key priorities. Archived from the original on 2 December 2020. Retrieved 12 December 2020. Puente, Maria (19 October 2020). "Prince William champions wildlife as he takes over conservation patronages from royal grandparents". USA Today. Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020. O'Grady, Sean (6 October 2020). "Prince William – A Planet For Us All, review: It's easy to be cynical, but I found it surprisingly moving". The Independent. Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 14 October 2021. Kirkpatrick, Emily (24 February 2021). "Prince William Secretly Helped Support the Families of Murdered Park Rangers in the Congo". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. Parker, Bashiera (28 July 2022). "Prince William demands 'justice' for murdered South African park ranger Anton Mzimba". News24. Archived from the original on 29 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Patterson, Charmaine (18 August 2022). "Prince William Praises the 63-Month Sentence Given to Wildlife Trafficker: 'Significant Victory'". People. Archived from the original on 19 August 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2022. Adesina, Precious (11 October 2018). "Prince William Urges Tougher Punishment for Poachers and Wildlife Smugglers". Time. Archived from the original on 19 August 2022. Retrieved 19 August 2022. Petit, Stephanie; Perry, Simon (10 June 2019). "Prince William Marks Landmark Birthday of Charity That Was a Favorite of Mom Princess Diana". People. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Samuelson, Kate (25 August 2017). "How Princes William and Harry Are Carrying on Causes Close to Princess Diana's Heart". Time. Archived from the original on 7 June 2018. Retrieved 24 July 2021. Picheta, Rob (11 September 2018). "Prince William launches mental health website". CNN. Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "Heads Up". Royal Foundation. Archived from the original on 13 September 2022. Retrieved 17 October 2020. Kosin, Julie (9 May 2019). "The Cambridges & Sussexes Launch Mental Health Texting Service Shout". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on 10 May 2019. Retrieved 10 May 2019. "Prince William reveals he is secret helpline volunteer". BBC News. 6 June 2020. Archived from the original on 9 June 2020. Retrieved 22 June 2022. McKnight, Jenni (29 March 2020). "Kate Middleton and Prince William endorse new mental health initiative during coronavirus lockdown". Hello!. Archived from the original on 16 April 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2020. "The Cambridges Introduce a Mental Health Program for COVID-19 Frontline Workers". Harpers Bazaar. 22 April 2020. Archived from the original on 5 January 2022. Retrieved 12 December 2020. Perry, Simon (9 September 2020). "Prince William Makes Surprise Trip to Northern Ireland to Pay Tribute to Frontline Workers". People. Archived from the original on 30 October 2020. Retrieved 27 October 2020. "The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge Voice This Morning's Mental Health Minute". The Royal Foundation. 14 May 2021. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 14 December 2021. Petit, Stephanie (13 May 2022). "Kate Middleton and Prince William Interrupt Radio Stations Across the U.K. with a Mental Health Minute". People. Archived from the original on 13 May 2022. Retrieved 13 May 2022. "Prince and Princess of Wales take over Radio 1 Newsbeat". BBC News. 11 October 2022. Archived from the original on 10 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. McTaggart, India; Ward, Victoria (14 September 2023). "Prince of Wales shakes-up running of Duchy of Cornwall with mental health scheme". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 14 September 2023. Retrieved 14 September 2023. Perry, Simon (14 September 2023). "Kate Middleton and Prince William Join Schoolchildren for Some Outdoor Learning Around a Campfire". People. Archived from the original on 14 September 2023. Retrieved 15 September 2023. Perry, Simon (10 October 2023). "Kate Middleton and Prince William Step Out for World Mental Health Day". People. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "Centrepoint – Our patron". Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2011. Press Association (22 December 2009). "Prince William sleeps rough for a night". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 March 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2021. Jobson, Robert (13 November 2019). "Prince William marks 50 years of homeless charity Centrepoint with south London visit". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 19 November 2020. Foussianes, Chloe (13 February 2019). "Prince William Is Now Patron of a Charity He Visited with Princess Diana as a Child". Town & Country. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 19 February 2021. Kirkpatrick, Emily (2 October 2020). "Prince William Discusses the Pandemic's "Frightening" Impact on the Homeless Community". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 16 January 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2021. Betancourt, Bianca (6 January 2021). "Prince William Secretly Volunteered at a Homeless Shelter over the Holidays". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2021. "Prince William spotted selling Big Issue in central London". BBC News. 9 June 2022. Archived from the original on 9 June 2022. Retrieved 9 June 2022. Rhoden-Paul, Andre (5 December 2023). "Prince of Wales sells Big Issue in supermarket". BBC News. Archived from the original on 5 December 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. Ward, Victoria (26 June 2023). "Prince William says his life's work will be to end homelessness". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 25 June 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023. D'Agata, Charlie. "Prince William launches "Homewards" initiative in a bid to "finally end homelessness" in the U.K." CBS News. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2023. Owen, Brodie (18 February 2024). "Nansledan: Prince William to build homes for homeless on Duchy land". BBC News. Archived from the original on 19 February 2024. Retrieved 18 February 2024. "Why is the Royal Family Obsessed With Polo?". Polo Weekly. 15 May 2019. Archived from the original on 2 December 2020. Retrieved 3 December 2020. "Prince George to support Aston Villa, says William". BBC News. 26 October 2013. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 24 December 2013. "Prince William to watch namesake cup tie". WalesOnline. 24 November 2007. Archived from the original on 26 January 2012. Retrieved 29 April 2011. "UK Parliament – Early Day Motion 230". UK Parliament. Archived from the original on 26 November 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2011. "Prince watches Wales lose his cup". BBC News. 24 November 2007. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009. Retrieved 29 April 2011. "Prince William to succeed Queen as Welsh Rugby Union patron". BBC News. 20 December 2016. Archived from the original on 9 February 2023. Retrieved 9 February 2023. "Prince William and David Cameron caught up in Fifa corruption scandal". The Telegraph. 27 June 2017. Archived from the original on 13 March 2020. "Video: David Cameron and Prince William implicated in FIFA corruption probe". Belfast Telegraph. 28 June 2017. Archived from the original on 14 September 2019. Savage, Nic (28 June 2020). "Peter FitzSimons condemns Prince William and England's Football Association for controversial World Cup vote". news.com.au. p. 1. Archived from the original on 28 June 2020. Retrieved 28 June 2020. "Duke of Cambridge: Football Association president calls for racist abuse of footballers to stop". BBC News. 31 January 2021. Archived from the original on 21 February 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2021. "Prince William criticises 'damaging' European Super League plans". The Athletic. 19 April 2021. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. Hassan, Jennifer; Adam, Karla (12 July 2021). "Boris Johnson, Prince William condemn racist abuse of England's Black players". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 9 August 2022. Retrieved 24 October 2021. "Prince William in Cardiff to launch WRU Coach Core scheme". BBC News. 1 October 2015. Archived from the original on 27 September 2016. Retrieved 9 January 2020. "Football, Prince William and Our Mental Health". BBC One. 28 May 2020. Archived from the original on 26 May 2020. Retrieved 29 May 2020. "Biking runs in Royal blood". Motorcycle News. 21 February 2018. Archived from the original on 22 May 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2018. "BSAC President - British Sub-Aqua Club". Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 18 November 2014. Jolley, Ben. "Lyn of Littleport invited to Stockholm to watch Duke and Duchess of Cambridge play bandy". Ely Standard. Archived from the original on 24 October 2018. Retrieved 28 November 2018. Low, Valentine. "Prince of Wales criticised by Michael Sheen over England support". The Times. Archived from the original on 21 December 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2022. "'The drive home will be tense': Prince William and Kate cheer on opposite sides at Wales vs England". The Telegraph. 26 February 2023. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2023. "'Can't be bothered': Fans slam Prince William for Lionesses final snub". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2023. Davies, Caroline (20 August 2023). "Prince William faces criticism for not attending Women's World Cup final". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 August 2023. Retrieved 22 August 2023. Vassell, Nicole (20 August 2023). "Prince William shares message after criticism for missing women's World Cup Final". The Independent. Archived from the original on 20 August 2023. Retrieved 22 August 2023. "15 Things You Probably Never Knew About Prince William". RD. 6 September 2019. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "Britain's popular Prince William bears royal weight on his shoulders". Reuters. 16 September 2022. Archived from the original on 16 September 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "Meghan Markle and Prince Harry's popularity plummets in the UK amid docuseries drama, while Prince William is crowned most loved royal". Sky News. 14 December 2022. Archived from the original on 14 December 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2023. Zeidler, Maryse. "That time teenage heartthrob Prince William visited Vancouver". CBC. Archived from the original on 21 September 2016. Retrieved 18 September 2016. "Prince William captures the attention of fans with buff look at New York's Billion Oyster Project". The New Zealand Herald. 19 September 2023. Archived from the original on 20 September 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. With his luscious locks and bright blue eyes, Prince William was a well-known heartthrob in his early adult years. "The Undying Fantasy of a Dreamy Prince William". Jezebel. 10 June 2021. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2023. La Ferla, Ruth (3 January 1999). "NOTICED; A Royal Crush". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2023. Kirka, Danica. "William at 40: A milestone birthday in a life under scrutiny". AP News. Archived from the original on 20 June 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2023. Specia, Megan (16 September 2022). "Prince William Moves Into the Spotlight as Heir to the Throne". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 September 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2023. McElvoy, Anne. "Prince William at 40 — a king-in-waiting determined to do things his own way". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2023. Nikkah, Roya. "Prince William to move family to the shires after his 40th birthday". The Times. Archived from the original on 27 November 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2023. Collins, Jackie (21 April 2011). "The 2011 TIME 100: Prince William and Kate Middleton". Time. Archived from the original on 21 September 2023. Retrieved 15 September 2021. McTaggart, India (9 August 2023). "Prince William named as America's most popular public figure ahead of Trump and Zelensky". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 9 August 2023. Retrieved 10 August 2023. Morris, Joanna (9 December 2022). "After Prince Andrew, Prince Harry and Meghan Markle remain Britain's most unpopular royals". YouGov. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2023. Smith, Matthew (4 September 2023). "One year into King Charles's reign, how do Britons feel about the monarchy?". YouGov. Archived from the original on 4 September 2023. Retrieved 5 September 2023. "Paparazzi's role in Diana accident". BBC News. 9 April 2000. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 18 September 2012. Cowell, Alan; Burns, John F. (14 September 2012). "Royal Couple Sue Over Photos of Topless Duchess". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 September 2012. Retrieved 18 September 2012. Julia Day (9 August 2006). "Phone tap investigation widens". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Pair jailed over royal phone taps". BBC News. 26 January 2007. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Phone-hacking row could draw in sports stars and ministers". The Times. Retrieved 7 July 2011. "Phone-hacking trial: Kate Middleton 'hacked 155 times'". BBC News. 14 May 2014. Retrieved 22 November 2021. Waterson, Jim (25 April 2023). "Murdoch firm 'paid secret phone-hacking settlement to Prince William'". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 April 2023. Tominey, Camilla (25 April 2023). "Blindsided by Prince Harry again, the royals must be feeling hacked off". The Telegraph. Retrieved 26 April 2023. Macke, Johnni (12 December 2022). "Everything Prince William Has Said About Navigating the U.K. Media: 'I Wouldn't Believe Everything You Read in the Paper'". Us Weekly. Retrieved 7 January 2023. Proudfoot, Jenny (16 August 2022). "Prince William once sent an angry letter to paparazzi to protect Kate". Marie Claire. Retrieved 7 January 2023. Holden, Michael (6 October 2007). "Britain's Prince William in paparazzi row". Reuters. Retrieved 9 January 2023. Brook, Stephen (30 April 2009). "Daily Star apologises to Prince William". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 August 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Malvern, Jack; Connolly, Sue (15 September 2012). "Spying photographers may have taken their shots of a secluded chateau from the road". The Times. pp. 6–7. "Kate and William to make criminal complaint over topless shots". BBC News. 16 September 2012. Archived from the original on 16 September 2012. Retrieved 16 September 2012. "Kate topless photos: French injunction against magazine". BBC News. 18 September 2012. Archived from the original on 18 September 2012. Retrieved 18 September 2012. "Insurance/Reinsurance Bulletin August 2011 – Insurance and punitive damages in France". Holman Fenwick Willan, solicitors. 2012. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 18 September 2012. "French Legislation on Privacy". Embassy of France in Washington. 2 December 2007. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 16 September 2012. Schofield, Hugh (17 September 2012). "Kate topless pictures: Criminal and legal cases". BBC News. Archived from the original on 17 September 2012. Retrieved 17 September 2012. "Kate topless pics: Closer magazine to pay royals in €100k damages". Sky News. 5 September 2017. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 5 September 2017. Sweney, Mark; Davies, Caroline (2 October 2014). "Duke and Duchess of Cambridge take action over Prince George 'surveillance'". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 December 2021. "A letter from Kensington Palace". www.princeofwales.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 28 March 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2016. Le Vine, Lauren (27 November 2016). "Prince William Issues Statement in Support of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle's relationship". Vanity Fair. Retrieved 7 January 2023. "Prince William criticises social media firms". BBC News. 15 November 2018. Archived from the original on 15 November 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2022. Sachdeva, Maanya (28 June 2022). "Palace responds to 'leak' of viral video showing Prince William confronting photographer". The Independent. Archived from the original on 28 June 2022. Retrieved 28 June 2022. Furness, Hannah (27 June 2022). "Royal family in privacy row with YouTube over video of Prince William confronting photographer". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022. Retrieved 28 June 2022. "Announcement of titles". The Royal Family. 29 April 2011. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2011. "No. 59798". The London Gazette. 1 June 2011. p. 10297. Furness, Hannah; Mendick, Robert (10 September 2022). "Royal family title changes: William and Kate become Prince and Princess of Wales". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 September 2022. Retrieved 10 September 2022. Elston, Laura (8 September 2022). "How the Royal Family's Titles Have Now Changed After the Death of the Queen". Bloomberg News. PA Media. Archived from the original on 10 September 2022. Retrieved 10 September 2022. "Duke of Cornwall and Cambridge". The Royal Family. Archived from the original on 9 September 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. Furness, Hannah; Mendick, Robert (18 September 2022). "Royal family title changes in full: William and Kate become Prince and Princess of Wales". The Telegraph. Retrieved 23 September 2022. "No. 63979". The London Gazette. 27 February 2023. p. 3638. "The Duke of Cambridge: Styles and Titles". The Royal Family. Archived from the original on 14 April 2012. "New appointments to the Order of the Thistle, 29 May 2012". The Royal Family. 29 May 2012. Archived from the original on 24 April 2018. Retrieved 23 April 2018. Palmer, Richard (10 June 2016). "Is Camilla's promotion first step to becoming Queen?". Daily Express. Retrieved 1 June 2020. "Privy Council members". Privy Council. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Duke of Cambridge becomes Aide-de-Camp to the Queen". The Telegraph. 17 March 2013. Archived from the original on 10 June 2016. Retrieved 6 May 2016. "Prince William, Prince of Wales' Royal Standard Flag and Coat of Arms..." Getty Images. Retrieved 25 June 2023. "Prince William–Emblems". The Royal Family. Archived from the original on 28 March 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2014. "The Coat of Arms of HRH Prince William of Wales". College of Arms. 15 March 2002. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Conjugal arms of The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge". College of Arms. 27 September 2013. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 4 November 2021. "Standards". The Prince of Wales. Archived from the original on 7 June 2016. Retrieved 31 August 2016. "The Prince of Wales". Public Register of Arms, Flags and Badges. Office of the Governor General of Canada: Canadian Heraldic Authority. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 4 January 2016. "New Flags for The Prince of Wales and The Duke of Cambridge". Office of the Governor General. 29 June 2011. Archived from the original on 4 February 2016. Retrieved 4 January 2016. "Canadian Flags of the Royal Family". Canadian Crown. Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016. Retrieved 4 January 2016. "Prince William, Duke of Cambridge". Public Register of Arms, Flags and Badges. Office of the Governor General of Canada: Canadian Heraldic Authority. Archived from the original on 6 February 2016. Retrieved 4 January 2016. Huberty, Michel (1994). L'Allemagne dynastique. Volume 7 ("Oldenbourg"). Le Perreux-sur-Marne: Giraud. ISBN 2-901138-07-1, ISBN 978-2-901138-07-5. Williamson, D (1981) "The Ancestry of Lady Diana Spencer". Genealogist's Magazine 20(6): 192–199; 20(8): 281–282 Reitwiesner, William Addams (2006). "The Ethnic ancestry of Prince William". wargs.com. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 24 December 2012. Sinha, Kounteya (16 June 2013). "Hunt on for Prince William's distant cousins in Surat". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2013. "A Royal Revelation". BritainsDNA. Archived from the original on 17 July 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2013. Brown, David (14 June 2013). "Revealed: the Indian ancestry of William". The Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on 27 June 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2013. Hern, Alex (14 June 2013). "Are there ethical lapses in the Times' story on William's 'Indian ancestry'?". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 20 August 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2013. Although Eliza Kewark was indeed thought of as Armenian, it's not particularly surprising that she would have had Indian ancestors; the Armenian diaspora had been in India for centuries at the time of her birth, and even the most insular communities tend to experience genetic mixing over that timescale. Paget, Gerald (1977). The Lineage and Ancestry of H.R.H. Prince Charles, Prince of Wales (2 vols). Edinburgh: Charles Skilton. ISBN 978-0-284-40016-1. Evans, Richard K. (2007). The Ancestry of Diana, Princess of Wales. Boston: New England Historic Genealogical Society. ISBN 9780880822084. Archived from the original on 10 December 2010. Retrieved 12 January 2017. Jobson, Robert (2010). William & Kate: The Love Story. London: John Blake Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84454-736-4. Lacey, Robert (2020). Battle of Brothers: William, Harry and the Inside Story of a Family in Tumult. London: William Collins. ISBN 978-0008408527. Morton, Andrew (2011). William & Catherine: Their Story. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-64340-9. Junor, Penny (2013). Prince William: The Man Who Will Be King. Pegasus. ISBN 978-1-60598-442-1. Graham, Tim; Archer, Peter (2003), William: HRH Prince William of Wales, Simon & Schuster, ISBN 978-0-74-324857-0 Junor, Penny (2013), Prince William: Born to be King, Hodder Paperbacks, ISBN 978-1-44-472041-9 Campbell, Alastair (29 May 2017). "Prince William on Diana, Princess of Wales: In the most candid interview he has ever given, Prince William, the Duke of Cambridge speaks". GQ. Hedges, Mark (21 November 2018). "The Duke of Cambridge on the countryside, wildlife and passing on his father's inspiring example to George, Charlotte and Louis". Country Life. The Prince of Wales at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata The Prince of Wales at the official website of the British royal family The Duke of Cornwall at the Duchy of Cornwall website The Prince of Wales at the website of the Government of Canada Portraits of William, Prince of Wales at the National Portrait Gallery, London Appearances on C-SPAN Prince William at IMDb The Prince and Princess of Wales on Instagram Portals:  Monarchy  United Kingdom  England  London  Scotland  Wales  Northern Ireland  Australia  Belize  Canada  Jamaica  New Zealand  Tuvalu