Andy Warhol (/ˈwɔːrhɒl/; born Andrew Warhola Jr.; August 6, 1928 – February 22, 1987) was an American visual artist, film director, producer. A leading figure in the pop art movement, Warhol is considered one of the most important American artists of the second half of the 20th century. His works explore the relationship between artistic expression, advertising, and celebrity culture that flourished by the 1960s, and span a variety of media, including painting, silkscreening, photography, film, and sculpture. Some of his best-known works include the silkscreen paintings Campbell's Soup Cans (1962) and Marilyn Diptych (1962), the experimental films Empire (1964) and Chelsea Girls (1966), and the multimedia events known as the Exploding Plastic Inevitable (1966–67). Born and raised in Pittsburgh, Warhol initially pursued a successful career as a commercial illustrator. After exhibiting his work in several galleries in the late 1950s, he began to receive recognition as an influential and controversial artist. His New York studio, The Factory, became a well-known gathering place that brought together distinguished intellectuals, drag queens, playwrights, Bohemian street people, Hollywood celebrities and wealthy patrons. He promoted a collection of personalities known as Warhol superstars, and is credited with inspiring the widely used expression "15 minutes of fame". In the late 1960s, he managed and produced the experimental rock band the Velvet Underground and founded Interview. He authored numerous books, including The Philosophy of Andy Warhol and Popism: The Warhol Sixties. He lived openly as a gay man before the gay liberation movement. In June 1968, he was almost killed by radical feminist Valerie Solanas, who shot him inside his studio. After gallbladder surgery, Warhol died of cardiac arrhythmia in February 1987 at the age of 58 in New York. Warhol has been the subject of numerous retrospective exhibitions, books and feature and documentary films. The Andy Warhol Museum in his native city of Pittsburgh, which holds an extensive permanent collection of art and archives, is the largest museum in the United States dedicated to a single artist. Warhol has been described as the "bellwether of the art market". Many of his creations are very collectible and highly valuable. His works include some of the most expensive paintings ever sold. In 2013, a 1963 serigraph titled Silver Car Crash (Double Disaster) sold for $105 million. In 2022, Shot Sage Blue Marilyn (1964) sold for $195 million, which is the most expensive work of art sold at auction by an American artist. Warhol was born on August 6, 1928, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He was the fourth child of Ondrej Warhola (Americanized as Andrew Warhola Sr.; 1889–1942) and Julia (née Zavacká, 1891–1972), whose first child was born in their homeland of Austria-Hungary and died before their move to the US. His parents were working-class Lemko emigrants from Mikó, Austria-Hungary (now called Miková, located in today's northeastern Slovakia). Warhol's father emigrated to the United States in 1914, and his mother joined him in 1921, after the death of Warhol's grandparents. Warhol's father worked in a coal mine. The family lived at 55 Beelen Street and later at 3252 Dawson Street in the Oakland neighborhood of Pittsburgh. The family was Ruthenian Catholic and attended St. John Chrysostom Byzantine Catholic Church. Warhol had two elder brothers—Pavol (Paul), the eldest, was born before the family emigrated; John was born in Pittsburgh. Pavol's son, James Warhola, became a successful children's book illustrator. In third grade, Warhol had Sydenham's chorea (also known as St. Vitus' Dance), the nervous system disease that causes involuntary movements of the extremities, which is believed to be a complication of scarlet fever which causes skin pigmentation blotchiness. At times when he was confined to bed, he drew, listened to the radio and collected pictures of movie stars around his bed. Warhol later described this period as very important in the development of his personality, skill-set and preferences. When Warhol was 13, his father died in an accident. As a teenager, Warhol graduated from Schenley High School in 1945, and also won a Scholastic Art and Writing Award. After graduating from high school, he enrolled in the Carnegie Institute of Technology, now Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, where he studied commercial art. During his time there, Warhol joined the campus Modern Dance Club and Beaux Arts Society. He also served as art director of the student art magazine, Cano, illustrating a cover in 1948 and a full-page interior illustration in 1949. These are believed to be his first two published artworks. Warhol earned a Bachelor of Fine Arts in pictorial design in 1949. Later that year, he moved to New York City and began a career in magazine illustration and advertising. Warhol's early career was dedicated to commercial and advertising art, where his first commission had been to draw shoes for Glamour magazine in the late 1940s. In the 1950s, Warhol worked as a designer for shoe manufacturer Israel Miller. While working in the shoe industry, Warhol developed his "blotted line" technique, applying ink to paper and then blotting the ink while still wet, which was akin to a printmaking process on the most rudimentary scale. His use of tracing paper and ink allowed him to repeat the basic image and also to create endless variations on the theme. American photographer John Coplans recalled that "nobody drew shoes the way Andy did. He somehow gave each shoe a temperament of its own, a sort of sly, Toulouse-Lautrec kind of sophistication, but the shape and the style came through accurately and the buckle was always in the right place. The kids in the apartment [which Andy shared in New York – note by Coplans] noticed that the vamps on Andy's shoe drawings kept getting longer and longer but [Israel] Miller didn't mind. Miller loved them." In 1952, Warhol had his first solo show at the Hugo Gallery in New York, and although that show was not well received, by 1956, he was included in his first group exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, New York. Warhol's "whimsical" ink drawings of shoe advertisements figured in some of his earliest showings at the Bodley Gallery in New York in 1957. Warhol habitually used the expedient of tracing photographs projected with an epidiascope. Using prints by Edward Wallowitch, his "first boyfriend", the photographs would undergo a subtle transformation during Warhol's often cursory tracing of contours and hatching of shadows. Warhol used Wallowitch's photograph Young Man Smoking a Cigarette (c. 1956), for a 1958 design for a book cover he submitted to Simon and Schuster for the Walter Ross pulp novel The Immortal, and later used others for his series of paintings. With the rapid expansion of the record industry, RCA Records hired Warhol, along with another freelance artist, Sid Maurer, to design album covers and promotional materials. Warhol was an early adopter of the silk screen printmaking process as a technique for making paintings. In 1961 and 1962, Warhol resided at a 1342 Lexington Avenue apartment/art studio. In 1962, Warhol was taught silk screen printmaking techniques by Max Arthur Cohn at his graphic arts business in Manhattan. In his book Popism: The Warhol Sixties, Warhol writes: "When you do something exactly wrong, you always turn up something". In May 1962, Warhol was featured in an article in Time with his painting Big Campbell's Soup Can with Can Opener (Vegetable) (1962), which initiated his most sustained motif, the Campbell's soup can. That painting became Warhol's first to be shown in a museum when it was exhibited at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford in July 1962. On July 9, 1962, Warhol's exhibition opened at the Ferus Gallery in Los Angeles with Campbell's Soup Cans, marking his West Coast debut of pop art. In November 1962, Warhol had an exhibition at Eleanor Ward's Stable Gallery in New York. The exhibit included the works Gold Marilyn, eight of the classic "Marilyn" series also named "Flavor Marilyns", Marilyn Diptych, 100 Soup Cans, 100 Coke Bottles, and 100 Dollar Bills. Gold Marilyn, was bought by the architect Philip Johnson and donated to the Museum of Modern Art. At the exhibit, Warhol met poet John Giorno, who would star in Warhol's first film, Sleep (1964). In December 1962, New York City's Museum of Modern Art hosted a symposium on pop art, during which artists such as Warhol were attacked for "capitulating" to consumerism. Critics were appalled by Warhol's open acceptance of market culture, which set the tone for his reception. In early 1963, Warhol rented his first studio, an old firehouse at 159 East 87th Street. At this studio, he created his Elvis series, which included Eight Elvises (1963) and Triple Elvis (1963). These portraits along with a series of Elizabeth Taylor portraits were shown at his second exhibition at the Ferus Gallery in Los Angeles. Later that year, Warhol relocated his studio to East 47th Street, which would turn into The Factory. The Factory became a popular gathering spot for a wide range of artists, writers, musicians and underground celebrities. Warhol had his second exhibition at the Stable Gallery in the spring of 1964, which featured sculptures of commercial boxes stacked and scattered throughout the space to resemble a warehouse. For the exhibition, Warhol custom ordered wooden boxes and silkscreened graphics onto them. The sculptures—Brillo Box, Del Monte Peach Box, Heinz Tomato Ketchup Box, Kellogg's Cornflakes Box, Campbell's Tomato Juice Box and Mott's Apple Juice Box—sold for $200 to $400 depending on the size of the box. A pivotal event was The American Supermarket exhibition at Paul Bianchini's Upper East Side gallery in the fall of 1964. The show was presented as a typical small supermarket environment, except that everything in it—from the produce, canned goods, meat, posters on the wall, etc.—was created by prominent pop artists of the time, among them sculptor Claes Oldenburg, Mary Inman and Bob Watts. Warhol designed a $12 paper shopping bag—plain white with a red Campbell's soup can. His painting of a can of a Campbell's soup cost $1,500 while each autographed can sold for three for $18, $6.50 each. The exhibit was one of the first mass events that directly confronted the general public with both pop art and the perennial question of what art is. In 1967 Warhol established Factory Additions for his printmaking and publishing enterprise. As an advertisement illustrator in the 1950s, Warhol used assistants to increase his productivity. Collaboration would remain a defining (and controversial) aspect of his working methods throughout his career; this was particularly true in the 1960s. One of the most important collaborators during this period was Gerard Malanga. Malanga assisted the artist with the production of silkscreens, films, sculpture and other works at The Factory, Warhol's aluminum foil-and-silver-paint-lined studio on 47th Street (later moved to Broadway). Other members of Warhol's Factory crowd included Freddie Herko, Ondine, Ronald Tavel, Mary Woronov, Billy Name and Brigid Berlin (from whom he apparently got the idea to tape-record his phone conversations). During the 1960s, Warhol also groomed a retinue of bohemian and counterculture eccentrics upon whom he bestowed the designation "superstars", including Nico, Joe Dallesandro, Edie Sedgwick, Viva, Ultra Violet, Holly Woodlawn, Jackie Curtis and Candy Darling. These people all participated in the Factory films, and some—like Berlin—remained friends with Warhol until his death. Important figures in the New York underground art/cinema world, such as writer John Giorno and film-maker Jack Smith, also appear in Warhol films (many premiering at the New Andy Warhol Garrick Theatre and 55th Street Playhouse) of the 1960s, revealing Warhol's connections to a diverse range of artistic scenes during this time. Less well known was his support and collaboration with several teenagers during this era, who would achieve prominence later in life, including writer David Dalton, photographer Stephen Shore and artist Bibbe Hansen (mother of pop musician Beck). On June 3, 1968, radical feminist writer Valerie Solanas shot Warhol and Mario Amaya, art critic and curator, at The Factory. Before the shooting, Solanas had been a marginal figure in the Factory scene. She authored the SCUM Manifesto, a separatist feminist tract that advocated the elimination of men; and appeared in the 1968 Warhol film I, a Man. Earlier on the day of the attack, Solanas had been turned away from the Factory after asking for the return of a script she had given to Warhol. The script had apparently been misplaced. Amaya received only minor injuries and was released from the hospital later the same day. Warhol was seriously wounded by the attack and barely survived; he was released after nearly two months. He had physical effects for the rest of his life, including being required to wear a surgical corset. The shooting had a profound effect on Warhol's life and art. Solanas was arrested the day after the assault, after turning herself in to police. By way of explanation, she said that Warhol "had too much control over my life". She was subsequently diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia and eventually sentenced to three years under the control of the Department of Corrections. After the shooting, the Factory scene heavily increased its security, and for many the "Factory 60s" ended ("The superstars from the old Factory days didn't come around to the new Factory much"). Warhol had this to say about the attack: Before I was shot, I always thought that I was more half-there than all-there—I always suspected that I was watching TV instead of living life. People sometimes say that the way things happen in movies is unreal, but actually it's the way things happen in life that's unreal. The movies make emotions look so strong and real, whereas when things really do happen to you, it's like watching television—you don't feel anything. Right when I was being shot and ever since, I knew that I was watching television. The channels switch, but it's all television. In 1969, Warhol and British journalist John Wilcock founded Interview. In 1970, screens and film matrixes that had been used to produce original Warhol works in the 1960s were taken to Europe for the production of Warhol screenprints under the name "Sunday B Morning". Warhol signed and numbered one edition of 250 before subsequent unauthorized unsigned versions were produced. The unauthorized works were the result of a falling out between Warhol and some of his New York City studio employees who went to Brussels where they produced work stamped with "Sunday B Morning" and "Add Your Own Signature Here". Since the works began as a collaboration, Warhol facilitated exact duplication by providing the photo negatives and precise color codes. Some of the unauthorized productions bore the markings "This is not by me, Andy Warhol". The most famous unauthorized reproductions are 1967 Marilyn Monroe portfolio screenprints. These "Sunday B Morning" Marilyn Monroe prints were among those still under production as of 2013. Art galleries and dealers also market Sunday B Morning reprint versions of several other screenprint works including Flowers, Campbell's Soup I, Campbell's Soup Cans II,Gold Marilyn Monroe Mao and Dollare bill prints. Although the original Sunday B Morning versions had black stamps on the back, by the 1980s, they switched to blue. Warhol had a retrospective exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art in 1971. His famous portrait of Chinese Communist leader Mao Zedong was created in 1973. In 1975, he published The Philosophy of Andy Warhol (1975). An idea expressed in the book: "Making money is art, and working is art and good business is the best art." Compared to the success and scandal of Warhol's work in the 1960s, the 1970s were a much quieter decade, as he became more entrepreneurial. He socialized at various nightspots in New York City, including Max's Kansas City and, later in the 1970s, Studio 54.[unreliable source?] He was generally regarded as quiet, shy and a meticulous observer. Art critic Robert Hughes called him "the white mole of Union Square". In 1977, Warhol was commissioned by art collector Richard Weisman to create Athletes, ten portraits consisting of the leading athletes of the day. According to Bob Colacello, Warhol devoted much of his time to rounding up new, rich patrons for portrait commissions—including Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, his wife Empress Farah Pahlavi, his sister Princess Ashraf Pahlavi, Mick Jagger, Liza Minnelli, John Lennon, Diana Ross and Brigitte Bardot. In 1979, reviewers disliked his exhibits of portraits of 1970s personalities and celebrities, calling them superficial, facile and commercial, with no depth or indication of the significance of the subjects. In 1979, Warhol and his longtime friend Stuart Pivar founded the New York Academy of Art. Warhol had a re-emergence of critical and financial success in the 1980s, partially due to his affiliation and friendships with a number of prolific younger artists, who were dominating the "bull market" of 1980s New York art: Jean-Michel Basquiat, Julian Schnabel, David Salle and other so-called Neo-Expressionists, as well as members of the Transavantgarde movement in Europe, including Francesco Clemente and Enzo Cucchi. Warhol also earned street credibility and graffiti artist Fab Five Freddy paid homage to Warhol by painting an entire train with Campbell soup cans. Warhol was also being criticized for becoming merely a "business artist". Critics panned his 1980 exhibition Ten Portraits of Jews of the Twentieth Century at the Jewish Museum in Manhattan, which Warhol—who was uninterested in Judaism and Jews—had described in his diary as "They're going to sell." In hindsight, however, some critics have come to view Warhol's superficiality and commerciality as "the most brilliant mirror of our times", contending that "Warhol had captured something irresistible about the zeitgeist of American culture in the 1970s." In 1981, Warhol worked on a project with Peter Sellars and Lewis Allen that would create a traveling stage show called, A No Man Show, with a life-sized animatronic robot in the exact image of Warhol. The Andy Warhol Robot would then be able to read Warhol's diaries as a theatrical production. The play would be based on Warhol's books The Philosophy of Andy Warhol and Exposures. Warhol was quoted as saying, "I'd like to be a machine, wouldn't you?" Warhol also had an appreciation for intense Hollywood glamour. He once said: "I love Los Angeles. I love Hollywood. They're so beautiful. Everything's plastic, but I love plastic. I want to be plastic." Warhol occasionally walked the fashion runways and did product endorsements, represented by Zoli Agency and later Ford Models. Before the 1984 Sarajevo Winter Olympics, he teamed with 15 other artists, including David Hockney and Cy Twombly, and contributed a Speed Skater print to the Art and Sport collection. The Speed Skater was used for the official Sarajevo Winter Olympics poster. In 1984, Vanity Fair commissioned Warhol to produce a portrait of Prince, in order to accompany an article that celebrated the success of Purple Rain and its accompanying movie. Referencing the many celebrity portraits produced by Warhol across his career, Orange Prince (1984) was created using a similar composition to the Marilyn "Flavors" series from 1962, among some of Warhol's first celebrity portraits. Prince is depicted in a pop color palette commonly used by Warhol, in bright orange with highlights of bright green and blue. The facial features and hair are screen-printed in black over the orange background. In September 1985, Warhol's joint exhibition with Basquiat, Paintings, opened to negative reviews at the Tony Shafrazi Gallery. That month, despite apprehension from Warhol, his silkscreen series Reigning Queens was shown at the Leo Castelli Gallery. In the Andy Warhol Diaries, Warhol wrote: "They were supposed to be only for Europe—nobody here cares about royalty and it'll be another bad review." In January 1987, Warhol traveled to Milan for the opening of his last exhibition, Last Supper, at the Palazzo delle Stelline. The next month, Warhol and jazz musician Miles Davis modeled for Koshin Satoh's fashion show at the Tunnel in New York City on February 17, 1987. Warhol died in Manhattan at 6:32 a.m. on February 22, 1987, at age 58. According to news reports, he had been making a good recovery from gallbladder surgery at New York Hospital before dying in his sleep from a sudden post-operative irregular heartbeat. Prior to his diagnosis and operation, Warhol delayed having his recurring gallbladder problems checked, as he was afraid to enter hospitals and see doctors. His family sued the hospital for inadequate care, saying that the arrhythmia was caused by improper care and water intoxication. The malpractice case was quickly settled out of court; Warhol's family received an undisclosed sum of money. Shortly before Warhol's death, doctors expected Warhol to survive the surgery, though a re-evaluation of the case about thirty years after his death showed many indications that Warhol's surgery was in fact riskier than originally thought. It was widely reported at the time that Warhol had died of a "routine" surgery, though when considering factors such as his age, a family history of gallbladder problems, his previous gunshot wound, and his medical state in the weeks leading up to the procedure, the potential risk of death following the surgery appeared to have been significant. Warhol's brothers took his body back to Pittsburgh, where an open-coffin wake was held at the Thomas P. Kunsak Funeral Home. The solid bronze casket had gold-plated rails and white upholstery. Warhol was dressed in a black cashmere suit, a paisley tie, a platinum wig, and sunglasses. He was laid out holding a small prayer book and a red rose. The funeral liturgy was held at the Holy Ghost Byzantine Catholic Church on Pittsburgh's North Side on February 27, 1987. The eulogy was given by Monsignor Peter Tay. Yoko Ono and John Richardson were speakers. The coffin was covered with white roses and asparagus ferns. After the liturgy, the coffin was driven to St. John the Baptist Byzantine Catholic Cemetery in Bethel Park, a south suburb of Pittsburgh, where Warhol was buried near his parents. The priest said a brief prayer at the graveside and sprinkled holy water on the casket. Before the coffin was lowered, Warhol's close friend and associate publisher of Interview, Paige Powell, dropped a copy of the magazine and a bottle of Beautiful Eau de Parfum by Estée Lauder into the grave. A memorial service was held in Manhattan for Warhol at St. Patrick's Cathedral on April 1, 1987. By the beginning of the 1960s, pop art was an experimental form that several artists were independently adopting; some of these pioneers, such as Roy Lichtenstein, would later become synonymous with the movement. Warhol, who would become famous as the "Pope of Pop", turned to this new style, where popular subjects could be part of the artist's palette. His early paintings show images taken from cartoons and advertisements, hand-painted with paint drips. Those drips emulated the style of successful abstract expressionists such as Willem de Kooning. From these beginnings, he developed his later style and subjects. Instead of working on a signature subject matter, as he started out to do, he worked more and more on a signature style, slowly eliminating the handmade from the artistic process. Warhol frequently used silk-screening; his later drawings were traced from slide projections. At the height of his fame as a painter, Warhol had several assistants, including notable artist George Condo, who produced his silk-screen multiples, following his directions to make different versions and variations. Warhol's first pop art paintings were displayed in April 1961, serving as the backdrop for New York Department Store Bonwit Teller's window display. This was the same stage his Pop Art contemporaries Jasper Johns, James Rosenquist and Robert Rauschenberg had also once graced. It was the gallerist Muriel Latow who came up with the ideas for both the soup cans and Warhol's dollar paintings. On November 23, 1961, Warhol wrote Latow a check for $50 which, according to the 2009 Warhol biography, Pop, The Genius of Warhol, was payment for coming up with the idea of the soup cans as subject matter. For his first major exhibition, Warhol painted his famous cans of Campbell's soup, which he claimed to have had for lunch for most of his life. It was during the 1960s that Warhol began to make paintings of iconic American objects such as dollar bills, mushroom clouds, electric chairs, Campbell's soup cans, Coca-Cola bottles, celebrities such as Marilyn Monroe, Elvis Presley and Elizabeth Taylor, as well as newspaper headlines or photographs of police dogs attacking African-American protesters during the Birmingham campaign in the civil rights movement. His work became popular and controversial. Warhol had this to say about Coca-Cola: What's great about this country is that America started the tradition where the richest consumers buy essentially the same things as the poorest. You can be watching TV and see Coca-Cola, and you know that the President drinks Coca-Cola, Liz Taylor drinks Coca-Cola, and just think, you can drink Coca-Cola, too. A Coke is a Coke and no amount of money can get you a better Coke than the one the bum on the corner is drinking. All the Cokes are the same and all the Cokes are good. Liz Taylor knows it, the President knows it, the bum knows it, and you know it. In 1962, Warhol created his famous Marilyn series. The Flavor Marilyns were selected from a group of fourteen canvases in the sub-series, each measuring 20" x 16". Some of the canvases were named after various candy Life Savers flavors, including Cherry Marilyn, Lemon Marilyn and Licorice Marilyn. The others are identified by their background colors. Warhol produced both comic and serious works; his subject could be a soup can or an electric chair. Warhol used the same techniques—silkscreens, reproduced serially, and often painted with bright colors—whether he painted celebrities, everyday objects, or images of suicide, car crashes and disasters, as in the 1962–63 Death and Disaster series. In 1979, Warhol was commissioned to paint a BMW M1 Group 4 racing version for the fourth installment of the BMW Art Car project. He was initially asked to paint a BMW 320i in 1978, but the car model was changed and it didn't qualify for the race that year. Warhol was the first artist to paint directly onto the automobile himself instead of letting technicians transfer a scale-model design to the car. Reportedly, it took him only 23 minutes to paint the entire car. Racecar drivers Hervé Poulain, Manfred Winkelhock and Marcel Mignot drove the car at the 1979 24 Hours of Le Mans. Some of Warhol's work, as well as his own personality, has been described as being Keatonesque. Warhol has been described as playing dumb to the media. He sometimes refused to explain his work. He has suggested that all one needs to know about his work is "already there 'on the surface'". His Rorschach inkblots are intended as pop comments on art and what art could be. His cow wallpaper (literally, wallpaper with a cow motif) and his oxidation paintings (canvases prepared with copper paint that was then oxidized with urine) are also noteworthy in this context. Equally noteworthy is the way these works—and their means of production—mirrored the atmosphere at Andy's New York "Factory". Biographer Bob Colacello provides some details on Andy's "piss paintings": Victor ... was Andy's ghost pisser on the Oxidations. He would come to the Factory to urinate on canvases that had already been primed with copper-based paint by Andy or Ronnie Cutrone, a second ghost pisser much appreciated by Andy, who said that the vitamin B that Ronnie took made a prettier color when the acid in the urine turned the copper green. Did Andy ever use his own urine? My diary shows that when he first began the series, in December 1977, he did, and there were many others: boys who'd come to lunch and drink too much wine, and find it funny or even flattering to be asked to help Andy 'paint'. Andy always had a little extra bounce in his walk as he led them to his studio. Warhol's 1982 portrait of Basquiat, Jean-Michel Basquiat, is a silkscreen over an oxidized copper "piss painting". After many years of silkscreen, oxidation, photography, etc., Warhol returned to painting with a brush in hand. In 1983, Warhol began collaborating with Basquiat and Clemente. Warhol and Basquiat created a series of more than 50 large collaborative works between 1984 and 1985. Despite criticism when these were first shown, Warhol called some of them "masterpieces", and they were influential for his later work. In 1984, Warhol was commissioned by collector and gallerist Alexander Iolas to produce work based on Leonardo da Vinci's The Last Supper for an exhibition at the old refectory of the Palazzo delle Stelline in Milan, opposite from the Santa Maria delle Grazie where Leonardo da Vinci's mural can be seen. Warhol exceeded the demands of the commission and produced nearly 100 variations on the theme, mostly silkscreens and paintings, and among them a collaborative sculpture with Basquiat, the Ten Punching Bags (Last Supper). The Milan exhibition that opened in January 1987 with a set of 22 silk-screens, was the last exhibition for both the artist and the gallerist. The series of The Last Supper was seen by some as "arguably his greatest", but by others as "wishy-washy, religiose" and "spiritless". It is the largest series of religious-themed works by any American artist. Artist Maurizio Cattelan describes that it is difficult to separate daily encounters from the art of Andy Warhol: "That's probably the greatest thing about Warhol: the way he penetrated and summarized our world, to the point that distinguishing between him and our everyday life is basically impossible, and in any case useless." Warhol was an inspiration towards Cattelan's magazine and photography compilations, such as Permanent Food, Charley, and Toilet Paper. In the period just before his death, Warhol was working on Cars, a series of paintings for Mercedes-Benz. "Though he is often associated with printmaking—specifically silkscreen—Warhol was also an incredibly talented illustrator and draughtsman, and drawing was an integral part of his practice throughout his career. His early drawings on paper bare a resemblance to both continuous line and blind contour drawing techniques, giving his work a sense of ease and immediacy. While working primarily within commercial advertisement, he pioneered the blotted line technique, which synthesized graphite drawing on paper with elements of printmaking. Warhol continued his practice of drawing through the last years of his life and career, and the work from this later period exemplifies a long and storied career's worth of honed skill and technique." The value of Andy Warhol's work has been on an endless upward trajectory since his death in 1987. In 2014, his works accumulated $569 million at auction, which accounted for more than a sixth of the global art market. However, there have been some dips. According to art dealer Dominique Lévy: "The Warhol trade moves something like a seesaw being pulled uphill: it rises and falls, but each new high and low is above the last one." She attributes this to the consistent influx of new collectors intrigued by Warhol. "At different moments, you've had different groups of collectors entering the Warhol market, and that resulted in peaks in demand, then satisfaction and a slow down," before the process repeats another demographic or the next generation. In 1998, Orange Marilyn (1964), a depiction of Marilyn Monroe, sold for $17.3 million, which at the time set a new record as the highest price paid for a Warhol artwork. In 2007, one of Warhol's 1963 paintings of Elizabeth Taylor, Liz (Colored Liz), which was owned by actor Hugh Grant, sold for $23.7 million at Christie's. In 2007, Stefan Edlis and Gael Neeson sold Warhol's Turquoise Marilyn (1964) to financier Steven A. Cohen for $80 million. In May 2007, Green Car Crash (1963) sold for $71.1 million and Lemon Marilyn (1962) sold for $28 million at Christie's post-war and contemporary art auction. In 2007, Large Campbell's Soup Can (1964) was sold at a Sotheby's auction to a South American collector for 7.4 million. In November 2009, 200 One Dollar Bills (1962) at Sotheby's for $43.8 million. In 2008, Eight Elvises (1963) was sold by Annibale Berlingieri for $100 million to a private buyer. The work depicts Elvis Presley in a gunslinger pose. It was first exhibited in 1963 at the Ferus Gallery in Los Angeles. Warhol made 22 versions of the Elvis portraits, eleven of which are held in museums. In May 2012, Double Elvis (Ferus Type) sold at auction at Sotheby's for $37 million. In November 2014, Triple Elvis (Ferus Type) sold for $81.9 million at Christie's. In May 2010, a purple self-portrait of Warhol from 1986 that was owned by fashion designer Tom Ford sold for $32.6 million at Sotheby's. In November 2010, Men in Her Life (1962), based on Elizabeth Taylor, sold for $63.4 million at Phillips de Pury and Coca-Cola (4) (1962) sold for $35.3 million at Sotheby's. In May 2011, Warhol's first self-portrait from 1963 to 1964 sold for $38.4 million and a red self-portrait from 1986 sold for $27.5 million at Christie's. In May 2011, Liz #5 (Early Colored Liz) sold for $26.9 million at Phillips. In November 2013, Warhol's rarely seen 1963 diptych, Silver Car Crash (Double Disaster), sold at Sotheby's for $105.4 million, a new record for the artist. In November 2013, Coca-Cola (3) (1962) sold for $57.3 million at Christie's. In May 2014, White Marilyn (1962) sold for $41 million at Christie's. In November 2014, Four Marlons (1964), which depicts Marlon Brando, sold for $69.6 million at Christie's. In May 2015, Silver Liz (diptych), painted in 1963, sold for $28 million and Colored Mona Lisa (1963) sold for $56.2 million at Christie's. In May 2017, Warhol's 1962 painting Big Campbell's Soup Can With Can Opener (Vegetable) sold for $27.5 million at Christie's. In 2017, billionaire hedge-fund manager Ken Griffin purchased Orange Marilyn privately for around $200 million. In March 2022, Silver Liz (Ferus Type) sold for 2.3 billion yen ($18.9 million) at Shinwa Auction, which set a new record for the highest bid ever at auction in Japan. In May 2022, Shot Sage Blue Marilyn (1964) sold for $195 million at Christie's, becoming the most expensive American artwork sold at auction. Among Warhol's early collectors and influential supporters were Emily and Burton Tremaine. Among the over 15 artworks purchased, Marilyn Diptych (now at Tate Modern, London) and A boy for Meg (now at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC), were purchased directly out of Warhol's studio in 1962. One Christmas, Warhol left a small Head of Marilyn Monroe by the Tremaine's door at their New York apartment in gratitude for their support and encouragement. Exploding Plastic Inevitable' (show) - the Velvet Underground & Nico, 1966, poster The Souper Dress, 1967, screen-printed paper dress based on Warhol's Campbell's Soup Cans BMW Group - 4 M1, 1979, painted car Warhol attended the 1962 premiere of the static composition by La Monte Young called Trio for Strings and subsequently created his famous series of static films. Filmmaker Jonas Mekas, who accompanied Warhol to the Trio premiere, claims Warhol's static films were directly inspired by the performance. Between 1963 and 1968, he made more than 60 films, plus some 500 short black-and-white "screen test" portraits of Factory visitors. One of his most famous films, Sleep, monitors poet John Giorno sleeping for six hours. The 35-minute film Blow Job is one continuous shot of the face of DeVeren Bookwalter supposedly receiving oral sex from filmmaker Willard Maas, although the camera never tilts down to see this. Another, Empire (1964), consists of eight hours of footage of the Empire State Building in New York City at dusk. The film Eat consists of a man eating a mushroom for 45 minutes. Batman Dracula is a 1964 film that was produced and directed by Warhol, without the permission of DC Comics. It was screened only at his art exhibits. A fan of the Batman series, Warhol's movie was an "homage" to the series, and is considered the first appearance of a blatantly campy Batman. The film was until recently thought to have been lost, until scenes from the picture were shown at some length in the 2006 documentary Jack Smith and the Destruction of Atlantis. Warhol's 1965 film Vinyl is an adaptation of Anthony Burgess' popular dystopian novel A Clockwork Orange. Others record improvised encounters between Factory regulars such as Brigid Berlin, Viva, Edie Sedgwick, Candy Darling, Holly Woodlawn, Ondine, Nico and Jackie Curtis. The underground artist Jack Smith appears in the film Camp. His most popular and critically successful film was Chelsea Girls (1966). The film was highly innovative in that it consisted of two 16 mm-films being projected simultaneously, with two different stories being shown in tandem. From the projection booth, the sound would be raised for one film to elucidate that "story" while it was lowered for the other. The multiplication of images evoked Warhol's seminal silk-screen works of the early 1960s. Warhol was a fan of filmmaker Radley Metzger's film work and commented that Metzger's film, The Lickerish Quartet, was "an outrageously kinky masterpiece". Blue Movie—a film in which Warhol superstar Viva makes love in bed with Louis Waldon, another Warhol superstar—was Warhol's last film as director. The film, a seminal film in the Golden Age of Porn, was, at the time, controversial for its frank approach to a sexual encounter. Blue Movie was publicly screened in New York City in 2005, for the first time in more than 30 years. In the wake of the 1968 shooting, a reclusive Warhol relinquished his personal involvement in film making. His acolyte and assistant director, Paul Morrissey, took over the film-making chores for the Factory collective, steering Warhol-branded cinema towards more mainstream, narrative-based, B-movie exploitation fare with Flesh, Trash and Heat. All of these films, including the later Andy Warhol's Dracula and Andy Warhol's Frankenstein, were far more mainstream than anything Warhol as a director had attempted. These latter "Warhol" films starred Joe Dallesandro, more of a Morrissey star than a true Warhol superstar. In the early 1970s, most of the films directed by Warhol were pulled out of circulation by Warhol and the people around him who ran his business. After Warhol's death, the films were slowly restored by the Whitney Museum and are occasionally projected at museums and film festivals. Few of the Warhol-directed films are available on video or DVD. In the mid-1960s, Warhol adopted the band the Velvet Underground, making them a crucial element of the Exploding Plastic Inevitable multimedia performance art show. Warhol, with Paul Morrissey, acted as the band's manager, introducing them to Nico (who would perform with the band at Warhol's request). While managing The Velvet Underground, Andy would have them dressed in all black to perform in front of movies that he was also presenting. In 1966, he "produced" their first album The Velvet Underground & Nico, as well as providing its album art. His actual participation in the album's production amounted to simply paying for the studio time. After the band's first album, Warhol and band leader Lou Reed started to disagree more about the direction the band should take, and their artistic friendship ended.[citation needed] In 1989, after Warhol's death, Reed and John Cale re-united for the first time since 1972 to write, perform, record and release the concept album Songs for Drella, a tribute to Warhol. In October 2019, an audio tape of publicly unknown music by Reed, based on Warhols' 1975 book, "The Philosophy of Andy Warhol: From A to B and Back Again", was reported to have been discovered in an archive at the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh. Warhol designed many album covers for various artists starting with the photographic cover of John Wallowitch's debut album, This Is John Wallowitch!!! (1964). He designed the cover art for The Rolling Stones' albums Sticky Fingers (1971) and Love You Live (1977), and the John Cale albums The Academy in Peril (1972) and Honi Soit in 1981. One of Warhol's last works was a portrait of Aretha Franklin for the cover of her 1986 gold album Aretha. In 1984, Warhol co-directed the music video "Hello Again" by the Cars, and he appeared in the video as a bartender. In 1986, Warhol co-directed the music video "Misfit" by Curiosity Killed the Cat and he made a cameo in video. Beginning in the early 1950s, Warhol produced several unbound portfolios of his work. The first of several bound self-published books by Warhol was 25 Cats Name Sam and One Blue Pussy, printed in 1954 by Seymour Berlin on Arches brand watermarked paper using his blotted line technique for the lithographs. The original edition was limited to 190 numbered, hand-colored copies, using Dr. Martin's ink washes. Most of these were given by Warhol as gifts to clients and friends. Copy No. 4, inscribed "Jerry" on the front cover and given to Geraldine Stutz, was used for a facsimile printing in 1987, and the original was auctioned in May 2006 for US$35,000 by Doyle New York. Other self-published books by Warhol include: A Gold Book Wild Raspberries Holy Cats Warhol's book A La Recherche du Shoe Perdu (1955) marked his "transition from commercial to gallery artist". (The title is a play on words by Warhol on the title of French author Marcel Proust's À la recherche du temps perdu.) After gaining fame, Warhol "wrote" several books that were commercially published: a, A Novel (1968, ISBN 978-0-8021-3553-7) is a literal transcription—containing spelling errors and phonetically written background noise and mumbling—of audio recordings of Ondine and several of Andy Warhol's friends hanging out at the Factory, talking, going out.[citation needed] The Philosophy of Andy Warhol (From A to B & Back Again) (1975, ISBN 978-0-15-671720-5)—according to Pat Hackett's introduction to The Andy Warhol Diaries, Pat Hackett did the transcriptions and text for the book based on daily phone conversations, sometimes (when Warhol was traveling) using audio cassettes that Andy Warhol gave her. Said cassettes contained conversations with Brigid Berlin (also known as Brigid Polk) and former Interview magazine editor Bob Colacello.[citation needed] Popism: The Warhol Sixties (1980, ISBN 978-0-15-672960-4), authored by Warhol and Pat Hackett, is a retrospective view of the 1960s and the role of pop art. The Andy Warhol Diaries (1989, ISBN 978-0-446-39138-2), edited by Pat Hackett, is a diary dictated by Warhol to Hackett in daily phone conversations. Warhol started the diary to keep track of his expenses after being audited, although it soon evolved to include his personal and cultural observations. Warhol created the fashion magazine Interview that is still published. The loopy title script on the cover is thought to be either his own handwriting or that of his mother, Julia Warhola, who would often do text work for his early commercial pieces. Although Andy Warhol is most known for his paintings and films, he authored works in many different media. Drawing: Warhol started his career as a commercial illustrator, producing drawings in "blotted-ink" style for advertisements and magazine articles. Best known of these early works are his drawings of shoes. Some of his personal drawings were self-published in small booklets, such as Yum, Yum, Yum (about food), Ho, Ho, Ho (about Christmas) and Shoes, Shoes, Shoes. His most artistically acclaimed book of drawings is probably A Gold Book, compiled of sensitive drawings of young men. A Gold Book is so named because of the gold leaf that decorates its pages. In April 2012 a sketch of 1930s singer Rudy Vallee claimed to have been drawn by Andy Warhol was found at a Las Vegas garage sale. The image was said to have been drawn when Andy was nine or 10. Various authorities have challenged the image's authenticity.[citation needed] Sculpture: Warhol's most famous sculpture is probably his Brillo Boxes, silkscreened ink on wood replicas of the large, branded cardboard boxes used to hold 24 packages of Brillo soap pads. The original Brillo design was by commercial artist James Harvey. Warhol's sculpture was part of a series of "grocery carton" works that also included Heinz ketchup and Campbell's tomato juice cases. Other famous works include the Silver Clouds—helium filled, silver mylar, pillow-shaped balloons. A Silver Cloud was included in the traveling exhibition Air Art (1968–1969) curated by Willoughby Sharp. Clouds was also adapted by Warhol for avant-garde choreographer Merce Cunningham's dance piece RainForest (1968). Audio: At one point Warhol carried a portable recorder with him wherever he went, taping everything everybody said and did. He referred to this device as his "wife". Some of these tapes were the basis for his literary work. Another audio-work of Warhol's was his Invisible Sculpture, a presentation in which burglar alarms would go off when entering the room. Warhol's cooperation with the musicians of The Velvet Underground was driven by an expressed desire to become a music producer.[citation needed] Time Capsules: In 1973, Warhol began saving ephemera from his daily life—correspondence, newspapers, souvenirs, childhood objects, even used plane tickets and food—which was sealed in plain cardboard boxes dubbed Time Capsules. By the time of his death, the collection grew to include 600, individually dated "capsules". The boxes are now housed at the Andy Warhol Museum. Television: Andy Warhol dreamed of a television special about a favorite subject of his – Nothing – that he would call The Nothing Special. Later in his career he did create two cable television shows, Andy Warhol's TV in 1982 and Andy Warhol's Fifteen Minutes (based on his famous "fifteen minutes of fame" quotation) for MTV in 1986. Besides his own shows he regularly made guest appearances on other programs, including The Love Boat wherein a Midwestern wife (Marion Ross) fears Andy Warhol will reveal to her husband (Tom Bosley, who starred alongside Ross in sitcom Happy Days) her secret past as a Warhol superstar named Marina del Rey. Warhol also produced a TV commercial for Schrafft's Restaurants in New York City, for an ice cream dessert appropriately titled the "Underground Sundae". Fashion: Warhol is quoted for having said: "I'd rather buy a dress and put it up on the wall, than put a painting, wouldn't you?" One of his best-known superstars, Edie Sedgwick, aspired to be a fashion designer, and his good friend Halston was a famous one. Warhol's work in fashion includes silkscreened dresses, a short sub-career as a catwalk-model and books on fashion as well as paintings with fashion (shoes) as a subject.[citation needed] Warhol himself has been described as a modern dandy, whose authority "rested more on presence than on words". Performance Art: Warhol and his friends staged theatrical multimedia happenings at parties and public venues, combining music, film, slide projections and even Gerard Malanga in an S&M outfit cracking a whip. The Exploding Plastic Inevitable in 1966 was the culmination of this area of his work. Theater: Warhol's play Andy Warhol's Pork opened on May 5, 1971, at LaMama theater in New York for a two-week run and was brought to the Roundhouse in London for a longer run in August 1971. Pork was based on tape-recorded conversations between Brigid Berlin and Andy during which Brigid would play for Andy tapes she had made of phone conversations between herself and her mother, socialite Honey Berlin. The play featured Jayne County as "Vulva" and Cherry Vanilla as "Amanda Pork". In 1974, Andy Warhol also produced the stage musical Man on the Moon, which was written by John Phillips of the Mamas and the Papas. Photography: To produce his silkscreens, Warhol made photographs or had them made by his friends and assistants. These pictures were mostly taken with a specific model of Polaroid camera, The Big Shot, that Polaroid kept in production especially for Warhol. This photographic approach to painting and his snapshot method of taking pictures has had a great effect on artistic photography. Warhol was an accomplished photographer, and took an enormous number of photographs of Factory visitors, friends, acquired by Stanford University. Music: In 1963, Warhol founded The Druds, a short-lived avant-garde noise music band that featured prominent members of the New York proto-conceptual art and minimal art community. Computer: Warhol used Amiga computers to generate digital art, including You Are the One, which he helped design and build with Amiga, Inc. He also displayed the difference between slow fill and fast fill on live TV with Debbie Harry as a model. In 1980, Warhol told an interviewer that he was still a virgin. Biographer Bob Colacello, who was present at the interview, felt it was probably true and that what little sex he had was probably "a mixture of voyeurism and masturbation—to use [Andy's] word abstract". Warhol's assertion of virginity would seem to be contradicted by his hospital treatment in 1960 for condylomata, a sexually transmitted disease. It has also been contradicted by his lovers, including Billy Name: "He was the essence of sexuality. It permeated everything. Andy exuded it, along with his great artistic creativity....It brought a joy to the whole art world in New York." "But his personality was so vulnerable that it became a defense to put up the blank front," said Name. Warhol's muse BillyBoy also denied that he was only a voyeur and said they had sex to orgasm: "When he wasn't being Andy Warhol and when you were just alone with him he was an incredibly generous and very kind person. What seduced me was the Andy Warhol who I saw alone. In fact when I was with him in public he kind of got on my nerves....I'd say: 'You're just obnoxious, I can't bear you.'" Warhol's lovers included John Giorno, Billy Name, Charles Lisanby, and Jon Gould. Gould was the most photographed subject of Warhol's later career and worked as an American film executive at Paramount Pictures. Warhol's longest-lasting relationship was with Jed Johnson, who was his collaborator and later achieved fame as an interior designer. Warhol and Johnson "functioned as husband and husband, sharing a bed and a domestic life" for 12 years. The fact that Warhol's homosexuality influenced his work and shaped his relationship to the art world is a major subject of scholarship on the artist and is an issue that Warhol himself addressed in interviews, in conversation with his contemporaries, and in his publications (e.g., Popism: The Warhol 1960s). Throughout his career, Warhol produced erotic photography and drawings of male nudes. Many of his most famous works (portraits of Liza Minnelli, Judy Garland, and Elizabeth Taylor and films such as Blow Job, My Hustler and Lonesome Cowboys) draw from gay underground culture or openly explore the complexity of sexuality and desire. As has been addressed by a range of scholars, many of his films premiered in gay porn theaters, including the New Andy Warhol Garrick Theatre and 55th Street Playhouse, in the late 1960s. The first works that Warhol submitted to a fine art gallery, homoerotic drawings of male nudes, were rejected for being too openly gay. In Popism, furthermore, the artist recalls a conversation with the filmmaker Emile de Antonio about the difficulty Warhol had being accepted socially by the then-more-famous (but closeted) gay artists Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg. De Antonio explained that Warhol was "too swish and that upsets them". In response to this, Warhol writes, "There was nothing I could say to that. It was all too true. So I decided I just wasn't going to care, because those were all the things that I didn't want to change anyway, that I didn't think I 'should' want to change ... Other people could change their attitudes but not me". In exploring Warhol's biography, many turn to this period—the late 1950s and early 1960s—as a key moment in the development of his persona. Some have suggested that his frequent refusal to comment on his work, to speak about himself (confining himself in interviews to responses like "Um, no" and "Um, yes", and often allowing others to speak for him)—and even the evolution of his pop style—can be traced to the years when Warhol was first dismissed by the inner circles of the New York art world. Warhol was a practising Ruthenian Catholic. He regularly volunteered at homeless shelters in New York City, particularly during the busier times of the year, and described himself as a religious person. Many of Warhol's later works depicted religious subjects, including two series, Details of Renaissance Paintings (1984) and The Last Supper (1986). In addition, a body of religious-themed works was found posthumously in his estate. Warhol regularly attended Mass, and the priest at Warhol's church, Saint Vincent Ferrer, said that the artist went there almost daily, although he was not observed taking Communion or going to Confession and sat or knelt in the pews at the back. The priest thought he was afraid of being recognized; Warhol said he was self-conscious about being seen in a Latin Catholic church crossing himself "in the Orthodox way" (right to left instead of the reverse). Warhol's art is noticeably influenced by the Eastern Christian tradition which was so evident in his places of worship. Warhol's brother has described the artist as "really religious, but he didn't want people to know about that because [it was] private". Despite the private nature of his faith, in Warhol's eulogy John Richardson depicted it as devout: "To my certain knowledge, he was responsible for at least one conversion. He took considerable pride in financing his nephew's studies for the priesthood". Warhol was an avid collector. His friends referred to his numerous collections, which filled not only his four-story townhouse, but also a nearby storage unit, as "Andy's Stuff". The true extent of his collections was not discovered until after his death, when The Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh took in 641 boxes of his "Stuff". Warhol's collections included a Coca-Cola memorabilia sign, and 19th century paintings along with airplane menus, unpaid invoices, pizza dough, pornographic pulp novels, newspapers, stamps, supermarket flyers and cookie jars, among other eccentricities. It also included significant works of art, such as George Bellows's Miss Bentham. One of his main collections was his wigs. Warhol owned more than 40 and felt very protective of his hairpieces, which were sewn by a New York wig-maker from hair imported from Italy. In 1985, a girl snatched Warhol's wig off his head. It was later discovered in Warhol's diary entry for that day that he wrote: "I don't know what held me back from pushing her over the balcony." In 1960, he had bought a drawing of a light bulb by Jasper Johns. Another item found in Warhol's boxes at the museum in Pittsburgh was a mummified human foot from Ancient Egypt. The curator of anthropology at Carnegie Museum of Natural History felt that Warhol most likely found it at a flea market. Warhol collected many books, with more than 1,200 titles in his collection. Of these, 139 titles have been publicly identified through a 1988 Sotheby's Auction catalog, The Andy Warhol Collection and can be viewed online. His book collection reflects his eclectic taste and interests, and includes books written by and about some of his acquaintances and friends. Some of the titles in his collection include The Two Mrs. Grenvilles: A Novel by Dominick Dunne, Artists in Uniform by Max Eastman, Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology by George Clinton Andrews, D.V. by Diana Vreeland, Blood of a Poet by Jean Cocteau, Watercolours by Francesco Clemente, Little World, Hello! by Jimmy Savo, Hidden Faces by Salvador Dalí and The Dinah Shore Cookbook. In 2002, the US Postal Service issued an 18-cent stamp commemorating Warhol. Designed by Richard Sheaff of Scottsdale, Arizona, the stamp was unveiled at a ceremony at The Andy Warhol Museum and features Warhol's painting "Self-Portrait, 1964". In March 2011, a chrome statue of Andy Warhol and his Polaroid camera was revealed at Union Square in New York City. A crater on Mercury was named after Warhol in 2012. In 2013, to honor the 85th anniversary of Warhol's birthday, The Andy Warhol Museum and EarthCam launched a collaborative project titled Figment, a live feed of Warhol's gravesite. Warhol's will dictated that his entire estate—with the exception of a few modest legacies to family members—would go to create a foundation dedicated to the "advancement of the visual arts". Warhol had so many possessions that it took Sotheby's nine days to auction his estate after his death; the auction grossed more than US$20 million. In 1987, in accordance with Warhol's will, the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts began. The foundation serves as the estate of Andy Warhol, but also has a mission "to foster innovative artistic expression and the creative process" and is "focused primarily on supporting work of a challenging and often experimental nature". The Artists Rights Society is the US copyright representative for the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts for all Warhol works with the exception of Warhol film stills. The US copyright representative for Warhol film stills is the Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh. Additionally, the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts has agreements in place for its image archive. All digital images of Warhol are exclusively managed by Corbis, while all transparency images of Warhol are managed by Art Resource. The Andy Warhol Foundation released its 20th Anniversary Annual Report as a three-volume set in 2007: Vol. I, 1987–2007; Vol. II, Grants & Exhibitions; and Vol. III, Legacy Program. The Foundation is in the process of compiling its catalogue raisonné of paintings and sculptures in volumes covering blocks of years of the artist's career. Volumes IV and V were released in 2019. The subsequent volumes are still in the process of being compiled. The Foundation remains one of the largest grant-giving organizations for the visual arts in the US. Many of Warhol's works and possessions are on display at the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh. The foundation donated more than 3,000 works of art to the museum. From November 19, 2021 – June 19, 2022, the Brooklyn Museum displayed the Andy Warhol: Revelation exhibition. Revelation examines themes such as life and death, power and desire, the role and representation of women, Renaissance imagery, family and immigrant traditions and rituals, depictions and duplications of Christ and the Catholic body and queer desire. Among the more than one hundred objects on view were rare source materials and newly discovered items that provide a fresh and intimate look at Warhol's creative process, as well as major paintings from his epic Last Supper series (1986), the experimental film The Chelsea Girls (1966), an unfinished film depicting the setting sun commissioned by the de Menil family and funded by the Roman Catholic Church and drawings created by Warhol's mother, Julia Warhola, when she lived with her son in New York City. Warhol founded Interview, a stage for celebrities he "endorsed" and a business staffed by his friends. He collaborated with others on all of his books (some of which were written with Pat Hackett.) One might even say that he produced people (as in the Warholian "Superstar" and the Warholian portrait). Warhol endorsed products, appeared in commercials, and made frequent celebrity guest appearances on television shows and in films (he appeared in everything from Love Boat to Saturday Night Live, as well as the Richard Pryor movie Dynamite Chicken). In this respect Warhol was a fan of "Art Business" and "Business Art"—he, in fact, wrote about his interest in thinking about art as business in The Philosophy of Andy Warhol from A to B and Back Again. Warhol appeared as himself in the film Cocaine Cowboys (1979) and in the film Tootsie (1982). After his death, Warhol was portrayed by Crispin Glover in Oliver Stone's film The Doors (1991), by Jared Harris in Mary Harron's film I Shot Andy Warhol (1996) and by David Bowie in Julian Schnabel's film Basquiat (1996). Bowie recalled how meeting Warhol in real life helped him in the role, and recounted his early meetings with him: I met him a couple of times, but we seldom shared more than platitudes. The first time we saw each other an awkward silence fell till he remarked my bright yellow shoes and started talking enthusiastically. He wanted to be very superficial. And seemingly emotionless, indifferent, just like a dead fish. Lou Reed described him most profoundly when he once told me they should bring a doll of Andy on the market: a doll that you wind up and doesn't do anything. But I managed to observe him well, and that was a helping hand for the film [Basquiat...] We borrowed his clothes from the museum in Pittsburgh, and they were intact, unwashed. Even the pockets weren't emptied: they contained pancake, white, deadly pale fond de teint which Andy always smeared on his face, a check torn in pieces, someone's address, lots of homeopathic pills and a wig. Andy always wore those silver wigs, but he never admitted it were wigs. One of his hairdressers has told me lately that he had his wigs regularly cut, like it were real hair. When the wig was trimmed, he put on another next month as if his hair had grown. Warhol appears as a character in Michael Daugherty's opera Jackie O (1997). Actor Mark Bringleson makes a brief cameo as Warhol in Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery (1997). Many films by avant-garde cineast Jonas Mekas have caught the moments of Warhol's life. Sean Gregory Sullivan depicted Warhol in the film 54 (1998). Guy Pearce portrayed Warhol in the film Factory Girl (2007) about Edie Sedgwick's life. Actor Greg Travis portrays Warhol in a brief scene from the film Watchmen (2009). Comedian Conan O'Brien portrayed Warhol in the film Weird: The Al Yankovic Story (2022). In the movie Highway to Hell a group of Andy Warhols are part of the Good Intentions Paving Company where good-intentioned souls are ground into pavement. In the film Men in Black 3 (2012) Andy Warhol turns out to really be undercover MIB Agent W (played by Bill Hader). Warhol is throwing a party at The Factory in 1969, where he is looked up by MIB Agents K and J (J from the future). Agent W is desperate to end his undercover job ("I'm so out of ideas I'm painting soup cans and bananas, for Christ sakes!", "You gotta fake my death, okay? I can't listen to sitar music anymore." and "I can't tell the women from the men."). Andy Warhol (portrayed by Tom Meeten) is one of main characters of the 2012 British television show Noel Fielding's Luxury Comedy. The character is portrayed as having robot-like mannerisms. In the 2017 feature The Billionaire Boys Club, Cary Elwes portrays Warhol in a film based on the true story about Ron Levin (portrayed by Kevin Spacey) a friend of Warhol's who was murdered in 1986. In September 2016, it was announced that Jared Leto would portray the title character in Warhol, an upcoming American biographical drama film produced by Michael De Luca and written by Terence Winter, based on the book Warhol: The Biography by Victor Bockris. Absolut Warhola (2001) was produced by Polish director Stanislaw Mucha, featuring Warhol's parents' family and hometown in Slovakia. Andy Warhol: A Documentary Film (2006) is a reverential, four-hour movie by Ric Burns that won a Peabody Award in 2006. Andy Warhol: Double Denied (2006) is a 52-minute movie by Ian Yentob about the difficulties authenticating Warhol's work. Andy Warhol's People Factory (2008), a three-part television documentary directed by Catherine Shorr, features interviews with several of Warhol's associates. The Andy Warhol Diaries (2022), a six-part docuseries directed by Andrew Rossi, was released on Netflix chronicling Warhol's life from the vantage point of his diaries. Warhol appeared as a recurring character in TV series Vinyl, played by John Cameron Mitchell. Warhol was portrayed by Evan Peters in the American Horror Story: Cult episode "Valerie Solanas Died for Your Sins: Scumbag". The episode depicts the attempted assassination of Warhol by Valerie Solanas (Lena Dunham). In early 1969, Andy Warhol was commissioned by Braniff International to appear in two television commercials to promote the luxury airline's "When You Got It – Flaunt It" campaign. The campaign was created by the advertising agency Lois Holland Calloway, which was led by George Lois, creator of a famed series of Esquire covers. The first commercial series involved pairing unlikely people who shared the fact that they both flew Braniff Airways. Warhol was paired with boxing legend Sonny Liston. The odd commercial worked, as did the others that featured unlikely fellow travelers, such as painter Salvador Dalí and baseball legend Whitey Ford. Two additional commercials for Braniff were created that featured famous persons entering a Braniff jet and being greeted by a Braniff hostess, while espousing their like for flying Braniff. Warhol was also featured in the first of these commercials that were also produced by Lois and were released in the summer of 1969. Lois has incorrectly stated that he was commissioned by Braniff in 1967 for representation during that year, but at that time Madison Avenue advertising doyenne Mary Wells Lawrence, who was married to Braniff's chairman and president Harding Lawrence, was representing the Dallas-based carrier at that time. Lois succeeded Wells Rich Greene Agency on December 1, 1968. The rights to Warhol's films for Braniff and his signed contracts are owned by a private trust and are administered by Braniff Airways Foundation in Dallas, Texas. Warhol strongly influenced the new wave/punk rock band Devo, as well as David Bowie. Bowie recorded a song called "Andy Warhol" for his 1971 album Hunky Dory. Lou Reed wrote the song "Andy's Chest", about Valerie Solanas, the woman who shot Warhol, in 1968. He recorded it with the Velvet Underground, and this version was released on the VU album in 1985. The band Triumph also wrote a song about Andy Warhol, "Stranger In A Strange Land" off their 1984 album Thunder Seven. A biography of Andy Warhol written by art critic Blake Gopnik was published in 2020 under the title Warhol. Warhol is featured as a character in the Miracleman series of comics. It is first mentioned that he was resurrected by the alien scientist Mors and subsequently convinces the latter to mass-produce copies of himself. Later on, 18 copies of Warhol are seen in the underworld beneath the pyramid structure Olympus, where they produce pop art relating to the new superhuman regime. One Warhol clone numbered 6 is assigned to and develop a friendship with a clone of Emil Gargunza (Miracleman's creator) before the latter's betrayal and attempted escape. Warhol (played by Jeff Grace) makes a cameo appearance in the 2022 video game Immortality. Andy Warhol Art Authentication Board Andy Warhol Bridge, Pittsburgh, PA Andy Warhol Foundation v. Goldsmith, copyright case decided by the US Supreme Court LGBT culture in New York City List of LGBT people from New York City Moon Museum Painting the Century: 101 Portrait Masterpieces 1900–2000 Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary: "Warhol" Archived July 5, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Cotter, Holland (November 8, 2018). "Meet Warhol, Again, in This Brilliant Whitney Show". The New York Times. Retrieved April 1, 2024. He's the most important American artist of the second half of the 20th century. Metcalf, Stephen (December 6, 2018). "Andy Warhol, Cold and Mute, Is the Perfect Artist for Our Times". The Atlantic. ISSN 2151-9463. Retrieved April 1, 2024. He's now widely regarded as the most important artist of the second half of the 20th century. Acocella, Joan (June 1, 2020). "Untangling Andy Warhol". The New Yorker. ISSN 0028-792X. Retrieved April 1, 2024. There was no huger reputation than Warhol's in the art of the sixties, and in late-twentieth-century art there was no more important decade than the sixties. Much of the art that has followed, in the United States, is unthinkable without him (...) Trebay, Guy; La Ferla, Ruth (November 12, 2018). "Tales From the Warhol Factory – In each of three successive spaces called the Factory, Andy Warhol created movies, paintings, time capsules and psychosexual dramas with a half-life of many decades. Here his collaborators recall the places, the times and the man". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved November 13, 2018. Pescovitz, David (November 12, 2018). "Memories from Warhol's Factory". Boing Boing. Archived from the original on November 13, 2018. Retrieved November 13, 2018. Rosen, Miss (November 13, 2018). "Juicy Stories About What Andy Warhol Was Really Like – "Andy seemed to be floating through space. He had this magical energy and looked like nobody else."". Vice. Archived from the original on November 14, 2018. Retrieved November 13, 2018. Schaffner, Ingrid (1999). The Essential Andy Warhol. New York City: Harry N. Abrams. p. 79. ISBN 978-0-8109-5806-7. "The Pop master's highs and lows". The Economist. November 28, 2009. Retrieved February 3, 2021. "Andy Warhol painting sells for $105M". New York Daily News. November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "Andy Warhol: Biography". Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts. 2002. Archived from the original on July 24, 2010. Retrieved July 22, 2010. "Biography". Warhola.com. Archived from the original on February 19, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2010. V. Bockris, Warhol: The Biography, Da Capo Press, 2009, p. 15. "Mother". Warhola.com. Archived from the original on June 20, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2010. Paul Robert Magocsi, Ivan Pop, Encyclopedia of Rusyn History and Culture Archived January 26, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, University of Toronto Press, 2002. Jane Daggett Dillenberger, Religious Art of Andy Warhol Archived January 26, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Continuum International Publishing Group, 2002, p. 7. Bockris, Victor (1989). The life and death of Andy Warhol. New York City: Bantam Books. pp. 4–5. ISBN 978-0-553-05708-9. OCLC 19631216. "biography". warhol.org. Archived from the original on January 6, 2013. Retrieved January 13, 2013. "The Prince of Pop Art". Arthistoryarchive.com. Archived from the original on July 7, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2010. "Inspiring Young Artists & Writers". Scholastic Corporation. Archived from the original on October 27, 2010. Retrieved May 22, 2022. "Andy Warhol: The College Years". The Andy Warhol Museum. Archived from the original on February 9, 2015. Retrieved February 9, 2015. "History". www.artandwriting.org. Retrieved January 16, 2021. "Sprite Heads Playing Violins, 1948". the warhol. Archived from the original on February 9, 2015. Gopnik, Blake. "Feb 9, 2015: The Daily Pic". Blake Gopnik on Art. Archived from the original on February 9, 2015. Retrieved February 9, 2015. Colacello, Bob (1990), p. 19. Benstock, Shari and Suzanne Ferriss (editors). Footnotes: On Shoes; Rutgers University Press; February 1, 2001; ISBN 978-0-8135-2871-7; pp. 44–48. For Israel Miller see i.a. "A Little Jewel Box of a Shoe Store Archived May 18, 2017, at the Wayback Machine" by Christopher Gray, The New York Times, February 10, 2008. "Andy Warhol – Artists – Mnuchin Gallery". www.mnuchingallery.com. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Bodley Gallery Warhol exhibition announcement Archived July 16, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved March 24, 2011. Warhol, Andy; Glozer, Laslo; Schellmann, Jörg; Edition Schellmann (1994), Andy Warhol, art from art, Edition Schellmann; München : Schirmer/Mosel, ISBN 978-3-88814-725-8 Koestenbaun, Wayne (2015), Andy Warhol : a biography, New York, NY Open Road Integrated Media, Inc, ISBN 978-1-4976-9989-2 "Edward Wallowitch Young Man Smoking a Cigarette (c.1956 Gelatin silver print). The Andy Warhol Museum, Pittsburgh". Archived from the original on August 16, 2018. Retrieved August 28, 2019. Three one-dollar bills mounted on cardboard (1962). Photograph by Edward Wallowitch. The Andy Warhol Museum, Pittsburgh; Founding Collection, Contribution The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc. Printz, N. (2014). Making Money/Printing Painting: Warhol's Dollar Bill Paintings. Criticism, 56(3), 535–557. Oldham, Andrew; Simon Spence; Christine Ohlman (2002). 2Stoned. London: Secker and Warburg. p. 137. ISBN 978-0-436-28015-3. OCLC 50215773. Reder, Hillary. "Serial & Singular: Andy Warhol's Campbell's Soup Cans". Museum of Modern Art. Retrieved September 20, 2023. The Genius of Andy Warhol Pop. Harper Collins. 2009. pp. 87. ISBN 978006621243-2. "A Guide to Andy Warhol Prints: The Birth of an Iconic Pop Artist". Invaluable. April 8, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. "Max Arthur Cohn" Archived December 29, 2017, at the Wayback Machine at SAAM. Tony Scherman; David Dalton (2010). Pop: The Genius of Andy Warhol. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-093663-1. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 5, 2016. "The Slice-of-Cake School". Time. May 11, 1962. p. 52. "Andy Warhol's Big Campbell's Soup Can with Can Opener (Vegetable)". Christie's. May 16, 2017. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Livingstone, Marco (1992). Pop art: an international perspective. New York City: Rizzoli. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-8478-1475-6. OCLC 25649248. Angell, Callie (2006). Andy Warhol screen tests: the films of Andy Warhol: catalogue raisonné. New York City: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. p. 38. ISBN 978-0-8109-5539-4. OCLC 61162132. Lippard, Lucy R. (1970). Pop art. London: Thames & Hudson. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-500-20052-0. OCLC 220727847. Giorno, John (September 3, 2020). "In a New Memoir, John Giorno Recalls the Night Andy Warhol Conceived of His Epic Anti-Film While Watching Him Sleep—Read an Excerpt". Artnet News. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Lacey, Joann (January 23, 2021). History of Art and Architecture: Volume Two. Sugar Creek. p. 624. Elbaor, Caroline (November 21, 2016). "Andy Warhol's First New York Studio Sells for $9.98 Million". Artnet News. Retrieved May 2, 2022. Warhol, Andy (2006). POPism : the Warhol sixties. Internet Archive. Orlando : Harcourt. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-15-603111-0. "Double Elvis [Ferus Type] — Warhol's mirror to Sixties America". Christie's. Retrieved May 2, 2022. Warhol, Andy (2006). POPism : the Warhol sixties. Internet Archive. Orlando : Harcourt. p. 78. ISBN 978-0-15-603111-0. McKenna, Kristina (October 30, 1994). "Andy Warhol's Dream Factory". Los Angeles Times. Gopnik, Blake (May 30, 2017). "The First Book on Warhol's Sculptures Shows Him at His Best". Artnet News. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Salvo, Donna M. De; curator), Jessica Beck (Art museum (January 1, 2018). Andy Warhol: From A to B and Back Again. Yale University Press. p. 196. ISBN 978-0-300-23698-9. "Sale: Lettuce a la Metal and Turkey au Canvas; Gallery Market Hawks Art on Rye; Store Display Is Set Up for Pop Food Creations". The New York Times. October 8, 1964. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 13, 2021. Dean, Martin (March 13, 2018). "The Story of Andy Warhol's 'Campbell's Soup Cans'". Sotheby's. Wendy Weitman, Pop Impressions Europe/USA: Prints and Multiples from the Museum of Modern Art (NY: Museum of Modern Art, 1999). ISBN 978-0-87070-077-4 "2019: 50 Works for 50 Years". South Dakota State University. Retrieved April 11, 2023. Colacello, Bob (1990), p. 67. Menand, Louis (January 11, 2010). "Top of the Pops". New Yorker. Grow, Krystal (September 23, 2014). "Time Lightbox". Time Inc. Archived from the original on September 24, 2014. James, Dagon (2014). Billy Name:The Silver Age Black and White Photographs of Andy Warhol's Factory. Reel Art Press. p. 127. ISBN 978-1-909526-17-4. Solanas, Valerie (2004) [1967]. SCUM Manifesto. London: Verso. ISBN 978-1-85984-553-0. OCLC 53932627. Jobey, Liz, "Solanas and Son," The Guardian (Manchester, England), August 24, 1996, p, T10 and following. Warhol & Hackett 1980, pp. 287–295. Harding, James (2001). "The Simplest Surrealist Act: Valerie Solanas and the (Re)Assertion of Avantgarde Priorities". TDR/The Drama Review. 45 (4, Winter 2001): 142–162. doi:10.1162/105420401772990388. S2CID 57565380. Warhol, Andy; Pat Hackett (1980). POPism: the Warhol '60s. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp. 287–295. ISBN 978-0-15-173095-7. OCLC 5673923. Stiles, Kristine; Selz, Peter Howard (1996). Theories and Documents of Contemporary Art: a Sourcebook of Artists' Writings. University of California Press. pp. 345–. ISBN 978-0-520-20251-1. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013. Retrieved January 13, 2013. ""Interview" Celebrates 50 Years—and Toasts to 50 More". Interview Magazine. October 30, 2019. Retrieved September 22, 2021. Hintz, Paddy (December 8, 2007). "Factory practices: [1 First With The News Edition]". The Courier-Mail. p. T03. ProQuest 353917799. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Warren, Matt (April 17, 2001). "Factory prints: [S2 AND INTERACTIVE SUPPLEMENT Edition]". The Scotsman. p. 8. ProQuest 326950189. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Davis, Holly (May 30, 2019). "RMFA to exhibit "A Tribute to Sunday B. Morning and Andy Warhol"". TCA Regional News. ProQuest 2231708051. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Shaw, Kurt (August 18, 2013). "Venus in dispute: Is it a Warhol?". Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. p. 8. ProQuest 1425866395. Retrieved September 24, 2023. "What Is Sunday B. Morning And What Is The Connection To Andy Warhol Art". Gginaartonline. May 18, 2015. Retrieved September 24, 2023. "Andy Warhol vs. Sunday B Morning". Gginaartonline. March 30, 2018. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Canaday, Joan (May 1, 1971). "Art: Huge Andy Warhol Retrospective at Whitney". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved September 22, 2021. Broughton, Philip Delves (2012). The Art of the Sale. New York, NY: The Penguin Press. p. 165. "Andy Warhol Biography: From The Velvet Underground To Basquiat". Archived from the original on January 7, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2009. Hughes, Robert (February 18, 1982). "The Rise of Andy Warhol". The New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2021. "Weisman, Warhol and the Athletes". Christie's. Retrieved November 4, 2021. "Warhol's Jackson goes on display". BBC News. August 7, 2009. Retrieved March 30, 2010. "Andy Warhol Expert art authentication, certificates of authenticity and expert appraisers". www.artexpertswebsite.com. Archived from the original on February 27, 2018. Retrieved February 26, 2018. Lando, Michal (April 8, 2008). "Reexamining Warhol's Jews". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on July 3, 2011. Retrieved January 5, 2009. Alexander, Paul (January 27, 1992). "What happened to Andy's Treasures". New York. Vol. 25, no. 4. p. 28. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved December 4, 2013. Connolly, John (April 8, 1996). "School for Scandal". New York Magazine. Vol. 29, no. 14. p. 24. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved December 4, 2013. Piskor, Ed (2013). Hip Hop Family Tree. Fantagraphics. ISBN 978-1-60699-690-4. Ridenour, Al (May 16, 2002). "The Automated Andy Warhol Is Reprogrammed". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Magazine, Smithsonian; McGreevy, Nora. "Hear an A.I.-Generated Andy Warhol 'Read' His Diary to You in New Documentary". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Curley, John J. (January 30, 2014), "Andy Warhol", Art History, Oxford University Press, doi:10.1093/obo/9780199920105-0031, ISBN 978-0-19-992010-5, retrieved August 8, 2023 "Warhol: A Life As Art by Blake Gopnik: Book Review". Whitehot Magazine of Contemporary Art. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Watercutter, Angela. "Why 'The Andy Warhol Diaries' Recreated the Artist's Voice With AI". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Bockris, Victor; Gerard Malanga (2002). Up-tight: the Velvet Underground story. London: Omnibus Press. p. 66. ISBN 978-0-7119-9170-5. OCLC 49906101. Bosch, Lindsay J.; Mancoff, Debra N. (December 22, 2009). Icons of Beauty: Art, Culture, and the Image of Women [2 volumes]. ABC-CLIO. p. 672. ISBN 978-0-313-08156-9. ""Speed Skater" official 1984 Sarajevo Winter Olympics poster by Andy Warhol". Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved July 30, 2017. Vox, Tristan. "Purple Fame: An Appreciation of Prince at the Height of His Powers. Vanity Fair 1984 article, with especially commissioned portrait commissioned from Andy Warhol". Vanity Fair. Retrieved March 12, 2018. "Art historian, Thomas E Crow, analysis of Warhol's portrait of Prince, May 2018" (PDF). www.pacermonitor.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 17, 2018. Retrieved June 9, 2018. "Andy Warhol's Orange Marilyn 1962. Essay on the Warhol portrait style across three decades". www.christies.com. Archived from the original on February 28, 2018. Retrieved March 11, 2018. "Prince (1984) : Andy Warhol : Artimage". www.artimage.org.uk. Archived from the original on March 12, 2018. Retrieved March 11, 2018. "Andy Warhol and His Process: Screenprinting: sothebys.com". Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Raynor, Vivien (September 20, 1985). "ART: BASQUIAT, WARHOL". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Tate. "'Reigning Queens', Andy Warhol". Tate. Retrieved October 17, 2021. Warhol & Hackett 1989, p. 680. "The must-see exhibition in Milan: "Sixty Last Suppers" by Andy Warhol". Vogue Paris (in French). March 23, 2017. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Kornbluth, Jesse (March 9, 1987). "Remembering the World of Andy Warhol". New York Magazine. Retrieved October 18, 2021. "Le jour où Warhol est devenu le serviteur de Miles Davis". Numéro Magazine (in French). Retrieved October 18, 2021. Boorstin, Robert O. (April 13, 1987). "Hospital Asserts it Gave Warhol Adequate Care". The New York Times. Retrieved January 2, 2009. Sullivan, Ronald (December 5, 1991). "Care faulted in the death of warhol". The New York Times. Retrieved August 14, 2010. "Andy Warhol Heirs Settle Lawsuit With Hospital Over Artist's Death". Orlando Sentinel. December 24, 1991. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved December 4, 2013. Gobnik, Blake (February 21, 2017). "Warhol's Death: Not So Simple, After All". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 22, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2017. Wilson, Scott. Resting Places: The Burial Sites of More Than 14,000 Famous Persons, 3d ed.: 2 (Kindle Location 49627). McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers. Kindle Edition. "Paige Powell on Andy Warhol, Fashion and America's Art Scene". spearswms.com. January 9, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2022. "7 Wonders: Wonderfully Weird Warhol | Wonderland Magazine". Wonderland. August 6, 2014. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Glueck, Grace (April 2, 1987). "Warhol Is Remembered By 2,000 At St. Patrick's". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Amadour (February 15, 2023). "15 Minutes with George Condo". LAmag – Culture, Food, Fashion, News & Los Angeles. Retrieved September 9, 2023. Colacello, Bob (1990), p. 28. Smith, Patrick S (1986). Andy Warhol's Art and Films; UMI Research Press; p.98; ISBN 978-0-8357-1733-5 "The Soup Cans—Andy Warhol". Warholstars.org. Archived from the original on August 1, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2010. Warhol, Andy. The philosophy of Andy Warhol: from A to B and back again. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. "Marilyn". Richard Polsky Art Authentication. Retrieved November 16, 2021. "Record Warhol Leads Contemporary Sale". Sotheby's. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on January 15, 2015. Retrieved December 4, 2013. Taylor, James (2001). Original BMW M-Series. MBI Publishing Company LLC. pp. 28–29. ISBN 978-0-7603-0898-1. Warhol & Hackett 1989, p. 119Entry date: Thursday, March 23, 1978 Warhol & Hackett 1989, p. 136Entry date: Friday, May 19, 1978 The Art Gallery. Hollycroft Press. 1978. p. 75. "Bmw Art Car 1979: M1 by Andy Warhol". carbodydesign.com. Archived from the original on February 13, 2010. "Andy Warhol Biography (1928–1987)". Art Experts. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014. Retrieved January 15, 2014. Colacello, Bob (1990). Holy terror: Andy Warhol close up. London: HarperCollins. p. 343. ISBN 978-0-06-016419-5. OCLC 21196706. McGreevy, Nora (October 6, 2021). "Why Andy Warhol Peed on This Portrait of Jean-Michel Basquiat". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Emmerling, Leonhard (2003). Jean-Michel Basquiat: 1960–1988. Taschen. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-8228-1637-0. "Bundeskunsthalle – Ménage à trois". www.bundeskunsthalle.de. Retrieved August 30, 2021. "Andy Warhol, Jean-Michel Basquiat, and the Friendship That Defined the Art World in 1980s New York City". Vanity Fair. July 31, 2019. Retrieved August 30, 2021. Fretz, Eric, Jean-Michel Basquiat: A Biography. Greenwood Press, 2010. ISBN 978-0-313-38056-3. Claudia Schmuckli, "Andy Warhol: The Last Supper" (June 1999 – December 2001) Archived January 16, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Guggenheim Museum SoHo. Retrieved September 21, 2014. Collaboration with Andy Warhol: Jean Michel Basquiat Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, The Andy Warhol Museum. Retrieved September 21, 2014. Court dispute over Alexander Iolas' estate: "Anagnostou vs. Stifel Case – Supreme Court of the State of New York" Archived October 6, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Leagle, Inc., December 6, 1990. Retrieved September 21, 2014. Dillenberger, Jane (2001). The Religious Art of Andy Warhol. London: Continuum. pp. 10–11. ISBN 978-0-8264-1334-5. OCLC 59540326. Anthony Haden-Guest, "Warhol's Last Supper" Archived October 24, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, ArtNet, 1999. Spector, Nancy. Maurizio Cattelan: All. New York, NY: Guggenheim Museum Publications, 2011 Kennedy, Maev (September 1, 2001). "Warhol: Cars". The Guardian. London. Retrieved April 24, 2010. Network, Artnet Gallery (April 18, 2023). "Spotlight: A New Exhibition of Andy Warhol's Late-Career Drawings Reveals His Enduring Passions, From Fashion to the Animal Kingdom". Artnet News. Retrieved April 19, 2023. "Andy Warhol's Ever-Growing Art Market". fineartmultiple.com. Retrieved September 6, 2021. "Is Warhol Still Art's 'One-Man Dow Jones'? Dealer Dominique Lévy Breaks Down Five Myths About the Artist's Market". Artnet News. April 24, 2019. Retrieved September 5, 2021. Kamholz, Roger (November 5, 2013). "Andy Warhol and 'Orange Marilyn'". Sotheby's. Vogel, Carol (July 20, 2007). "Hugh Grant Parts With 'Liz' (a Warhol)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on August 23, 2007. Retrieved September 7, 2021. "Warhol's 'Liz' painting nets $23.7 million". TODAY.com. November 14, 2007. Retrieved September 7, 2021. Villa, Angelica (March 31, 2021). "Stefan Edlis, Chicago's Impresario Collector of Mischievous Art: 'You Will Never See a B-Grade Piece by an A-Grade Artist'". ARTnews.com. Retrieved September 6, 2021. "Warhol's "Car Crash" rakes in green". Art Observed. May 12, 2007. Retrieved September 6, 2021. "Early Lucian Freud Painting Leads Sotheby's $100 Million Contemporary Art Evening Sale Archived July 3, 2017, at the Wayback Machine" by Colin Gleadell, Artnet, February 10, 2016 Kamholz, Roger (November 3, 2013). "Andy Warhol and '200 One Dollar Bills'". Sotheby's. "The Pop master's highs and lows". The Economist. November 28, 2009. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved September 6, 2021. AP (May 10, 2012). "Andy Warhol's 'Double Elvis' sells for $37M, Lichtenstein's 'Sleeping Girl' gets $44M". Daily News. Archived from the original on September 29, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. AP. "Warhol 'Elvis' sells for $37M; Lichtenstein, Weiwei works break own records at NYC auction". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 31, 2018. Retrieved May 10, 2012. "Andy Warhol's Elvis triptych sells for $81.9m". BBC News. November 13, 2014. Archived from the original on November 13, 2014. Retrieved November 13, 2014. Vogel, Carol (May 13, 2010). "Warhol and Rothko Lead a Big Night at Sotheby's". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved August 30, 2021. "Andy Warhol piece sells for $35m". BBC News. November 10, 2010. Retrieved September 22, 2021. "Art Market Watch: Phillips de Pury does $137 million at its new headquarters – artnet Magazine". www.artnet.com. November 9, 2010. Retrieved September 6, 2021. "Andy Warhol self-portrait fetches $38.4m". BBC News. May 12, 2011. Retrieved January 30, 2017. Vogel, Carol (May 13, 2011). "Good Week for Warhol as 'Liz #5' Sells for $27 Million". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved September 7, 2021. "Record Warhol Leads Contemporary Sale". Sotheby's. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on January 15, 2015. Retrieved December 4, 2013. "Warhol painting fetches record $105M at NYC auction". Fox News. November 13, 2013. Retrieved December 4, 2013. Memmott, Mark (November 13, 2013). "Record $142.4M For Francis Bacon Art; Warhol Fetches $57.3M". NPR.org. Retrieved September 6, 2021. "In The Saleroom: Andy Warhol's White Marilyn". Christie's. May 15, 2014. Retrieved September 6, 2021. "In The Saleroom: Andy Warhol's Four Marlons". Christie's. November 13, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2021. "Andy Warhol (1928–1987) – Silver Liz (diptych)". Christie's. Retrieved September 7, 2021. Boucher, Brian (May 13, 2015). "Christie's Megasale Totals $658.5 Million". Artnet News. Retrieved September 26, 2021. "Christie's Postwar and Contemporary Sale Rakes In $448 Million". Artnet News. May 17, 2017. Retrieved September 5, 2021. Pogrebin, Robin (May 10, 2022). "Warhol's 'Marilyn,' at $195 Million, Shatters Auction Record for an American Artist". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Onishi, Wakato (March 31, 2022). "Warhol's Liz Taylor portrait fetches record price in Tokyo". The Asahi Shimbun. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Ulaby, Neda (May 9, 2022). "A Warhol 'Marilyn' brings a record auction price, $195 million". NPR. Retrieved May 10, 2022. (n. d.). Tremaine Collection / Miller Company: Artworks and designs Archived July 26, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. artdesigncafe. Retrieved April 1, 2020. Tate Modern, London. (n. d.). Andy Warhol. Marilyn diptych, (1962) Archived April 18, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 1, 2020. National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC. (n. d.). Andy Warhol. A boy for Meg, (1962) Archived July 26, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 1, 2020. Housley, Kathleen L. (2001). Emily Hall Tremaine: Collector on the cusp, (p. 160). Emily Hall Tremaine Foundation: Meriden, CT. Retrieved April 1, 2020. Husslein, Uwe (1990). Pop goes art: Andy Warhol & Velvet Underground. Wuppertal. OCLC 165575494.[page needed] "Andy Warhol Filmography". The Internet Movie Database. Archived from the original on May 27, 2010. Retrieved September 29, 2009.[better source needed] Schaffner (1999), p. 73. Hudson, David (August 7, 2014). "This Is Softcore: The Art Cinema Erotica of Radley Metzger". Fandor. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved February 29, 2016. Sandmir, Richard (April 4, 2017). "Radley Metzger, Whose Artful Erotica Turned Explicit, Dies at 88". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved April 5, 2017. Metzger, Juliette; Feldman, Caryl; West, Ashley (April 2, 2017). "Press Release: Radley Metzger, pioneering filmmaker, dies at 88". The Rialto Report. Retrieved April 2, 2017. "The Lickerish Quartet". Film Society of Lincoln Center. August 8, 2014. Archived from the original on May 25, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2015. Canby, Vincent (July 22, 1969). "Movie Review – Blue Movie (1968) Screen: Andy Warhol's 'Blue Movie'". The New York Times. Retrieved December 29, 2015. Canby, Vincent (August 10, 1969). "Warhol's Red Hot and 'Blue' Movie. D1. Print. (behind paywall)". The New York Times. Retrieved December 29, 2015. Comenas, Gary (2005). "Blue Movie (1968)". WarholStars.org. Archived from the original on December 30, 2015. Retrieved December 29, 2015. "Blue Movie (1969)". IMDb. February 10, 1972. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2015.[better source needed] "Blue Movie + Viva At NY Film Festival". WarholStars.org. October 2005. Archived from the original on October 27, 2015. Retrieved January 20, 2016. McNeil, Legs; McCain, Gillian (2016). Please kill me : the uncensored oral history of punk (Twentieth anniversary ed.). New York: Grove Press. ISBN 978-0-8021-2536-1. OCLC 955634990. Sisaro, Ben (October 30, 2019). "A Long-Lost Lou Reed Tape With a Surprise: Andy Warhol Lyrics – The cassette, discovered at the Andy Warhol Museum, finds the Velvet Underground musician performing snippets from his mentor's 1975 book". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2019. Bego, Mark (2001). Aretha Franklin: The Queen of Soul. Da Capo Press. p. 250. ISBN 978-0-306-80935-4. OCLC 46488152. "Clips Receive an Artful Showcase". Billboard. August 31, 1985. p. 52. Warhol & Hackett 1989, p. 560Entry date: Thursday, March 29, 1984 Warhol & Hackett 1989, p. 741Entry date: Tuesday, July 9, 1986 Warhol & Hackett 1989, p. 748Entry date: Tuesday, July 29, 1986 Vaziri, Aidin (February 8, 2009). "Warhol's greatest album covers". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved January 27, 2023. Russell, John (December 6, 1987). "Art". The New York Times. Retrieved January 5, 2009. May 3, 2006, auction at Doyle New York Archived August 14, 2006, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved August 14, 2006. Smith, John W., Pamela Allara, and Andy Warhol. Possession Obsession: Andy Warhol and Collecting. Pittsburgh, PA: Andy Warhol Museum, 2002, p. 46. ISBN 978-0-9715688-0-8. Warhol, Andy (1975). The philosophy of Andy Warhol : (From A to B and Back Again). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. ISBN 978-0-15-189050-7. OCLC 903973784. Archived from the original on December 23, 2019. Retrieved March 17, 2018. Colacello, Bob (1990), p. 183. Colacello, Bob (1990), pp. 22–23. Bourdon, David (1989). Warhol. New York: Harry N. Abrams. p. 51. ISBN 978-0-8109-1761-3. OCLC 19389231. "'Andy Warhol sketch found' in US garage sale". BBC News. April 2, 2012. Retrieved April 3, 2012. Staff of The Andy Warhol Museum (2004). Andy Warhol: 365 Takes. New York: Harry N. Abrams. p. 35. ISBN 978-0-500-23814-1. OCLC 56117613. Bourdon, David (1989). Warhol. New York: Harry N. Abrams. p. 231. ISBN 978-0-8109-1761-3. OCLC 19389231. Staff of The Andy Warhol Museum (2004). Andy Warhol: 365 Takes. New York: Harry N. Abrams. p. 157. ISBN 978-0-500-23814-1. OCLC 56117613. Ferguson, Michael (2005). "Underground Sundae". Archived from the original on January 16, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2009. "Monsters and Critics – Andy Warhol Biography". Archived from the original on December 16, 2013. Retrieved July 28, 2013. George Walden, Who's a Dandy?—Dandyism and Beau Brummell, London: Gibson Square, 2002. ISBN 978-1-903933-18-3. Reviewed by Frances Wilson in "Uncommon People" Archived March 5, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, The Guardian, October 12, 2006. Bourdon, David (1989). Warhol. New York: Harry N. Abrams. pp. 221–225. ISBN 978-0-8109-1761-3. OCLC 19389231. "Talk on the Wild Side: The Effect of Andy Warhol's PORK on the evolution of Glitter, Glam and Punk Rock". warhol.org. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2016. "Andy Warhol Photography Archive". Spotlight at Stanford. Stanford University. Retrieved February 5, 2022. From 1976 until his death in 1987, Andy Warhol (U.S.A., 1928–1987) was never without his camera. He snapped photos at discos, dinner parties, flea markets, and wrestling matches. Friends, boyfriends, business associates, socialites, celebrities, and passersby all captured Warhol's attention. Drawing on a trove of over 3,600 contact sheets featuring 130,000 photographic exposures acquired in 2014 from The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc., the images document Warhol's daily life. "The Big Shot Polaroid – Andy Warhol's Pen & Pencil". Casual Photophile. April 29, 2019. Archived from the original on May 12, 2020. Retrieved February 26, 2020. Blake Gopnik, Warhol:  A Life as Art London: Allen Lane. March 5, 2020. ISBN 978-0-241-00338-1 p. 297 "Andy Warhol's Amiga Experiments". 2014. Archived from the original on May 19, 2014. Retrieved May 19, 2014. Dillinger, Jane Daggett (2001). The Religious Art of Andy Warhol. New York City: Continuum International Publishing Group. pp. 16–17. ISBN 978-0-8264-1334-5. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2010. Scherma, Tony; Dalton, David (2010). POP: The Genius of Andy Warhol. New York City: HarperCollins. p. 49. "Billy Name | The man who silvered The Factory". CIVILIAN. October 28, 2013. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2016. "Factory Workers Warholites Remember: Billy Name". Interview Magazine. November 30, 2008. Archived from the original on January 12, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2016. Keller, Jerome (2007). "Warhol Superstars". Roundtable Interview Filmed at the Lauseanne Underground Film & Music Festival. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2016. Boon, Marcus (Fall 2008). "John Giorno". Bomb (105). Archived from the original on September 20, 2016. Retrieved September 18, 2016. O'Hagan, Sean (September 27, 2015). "I shot Andy Warhol: photographer Billy Name on drugs and shootings at the Factory". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved January 19, 2016. Koestenbaum, Wayne (2015). Andy Warhol: A Biography. Open Road Media. pp. 174–75. Goldsmith, Kenneth (July 7, 2004). I'll Be Your Mirror: The Selected Andy Warhol Interviews. Hachette Books. ISBN 978-0-7867-1364-6. Macias, Ernesto (March 21, 2022). "Meet Jed Johnson, the Man Who Stole Andy Warhol's Heart". Interview Magazine. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Gopnik, Blake (2020). Warhol. New York: Ecco. p. 248. ISBN 978-0-06-229839-3.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: date and year (link) Waugh, Thomas (1996). Hard to Imagine: Gay Male eroticism in Photography and Film from the Beginnings to Stonewall. New York City: Columbia University Press. Butt, Gavin (2005). Between you and me: queer disclosures in the New York art world, 1948–1963. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. p. 113. ISBN 978-0-8223-3486-6. OCLC 57285910. Fairbrother, Trevor (1989). "Tomorrow's Man". In De Salvo, Donna (ed.). Success Is a Job in New York: the Early Art and Business of Andy Warhol. New York: Grey Art Gallery and Study Center. pp. 55–74. ISBN 978-0-934349-05-5. OCLC 19826995. Schmuckli, Claudia (1999). "Andy Warhol: The Last Supper". SoHo: Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation. Archived from the original on January 16, 2009. Retrieved January 5, 2009. Romaine, James (November 12, 2003). "Transubstantiating the Culture: Andy Warhol's Secret". Godspy. Archived from the original on November 18, 2008. Retrieved January 5, 2009. Muchnic, Suzanne (May 8, 1988). "Warhol: Pop Artist or Crusader for Tradition?". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Retrieved February 26, 2018. "American Acquisition". Barber Institute of Fine Arts. Archived from the original on February 17, 2015. Retrieved February 16, 2015. Goldsmith, Kenneth. Capital: New York, Capital of the 20th Century. "The 5 most unusual habits of Andy Warhol". Inktank.fi. November 20, 2012. Archived from the original on January 23, 2013. Retrieved January 13, 2013. "Legacy Library: Andy Warhol". LibraryThing. Retrieved October 23, 2021. "Andy Warhol's Books". LibraryThing. Retrieved October 23, 2021. "Artists". United States Postal Service. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2013. McCoy, Adrian (August 10, 2002). "Andy Warhol Puts Stamp on the World – Again". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 22, 2013. "Andy Warhol Commemorated in Chrome on Union Square". the New York Times. March 31, 2011. Archived from the original on September 22, 2015. Retrieved August 6, 2015. "Warhol". Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature. NASA. Retrieved February 3, 2021. "Andy Warhol's Grave". The Andy Warhol Museum. Retrieved May 29, 2022. Begos, Kevin (August 5, 2013). "Webcam to broadcast from Andy Warhol's Pa. grave". USA TODAY. Retrieved May 29, 2022. "Introduction". The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts. Archived from the original on September 16, 2009. Retrieved January 2, 2009. "Artists Most Frequently Requested". Artists Rights Society. Archived from the original on January 31, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2009. "Museum info: FAQ". The Andy Warhol Museum. Archived from the original on December 20, 2008. Retrieved January 6, 2009. "Frequently Asked Questions". The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts. 2002. Archived from the original on January 6, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2009. The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts (2007). The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts 1987–2007 (PDF). New York City: The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts. ISBN 978-0-9765263-1-5. OCLC 180133918. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 19, 2008. Retrieved January 6, 2009. "The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts – Catalogues Raisonnés". warholfoundation.org. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved March 30, 2021. Wachs, Joel; Michael Straus (2002). "Past & Present". The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts. Archived from the original on January 6, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2009. The Andy Warhol Museum, The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, archived from the original on July 15, 2017, retrieved June 26, 2017 Rosenberg, Karen (December 2, 2021). "For Andy Warhol, Faith and Sexuality Intertwined". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 2, 2021. "Brooklyn Museum: Andy Warhol: Revelation". Matheson, Whitney (August 6, 2013). "See six of Warhol's best film/TV appearances". USA Today. Retrieved March 17, 2018. Munroe, Don; Fremont, Vincent; Etkin, Sue (October 10, 1981). Andy Warhol's TV: Makeup and Death. NBC. Retrieved March 17, 2018. "Ernest Pintoff, 70; Animator Won Oscar". Obituaries. Los Angeles Times. February 7, 2002. Retrieved March 17, 2018. Lommel, Ulli (1979). Cocaine Cowboys. "Can the Real David Bowie Rise, Please?". HUMO Magazine. December 5, 1995. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2013. Hickenlooper, George. Factory Girl. Muir, John Kenneth (2011), Horror Films of the 1990s, McFarland, p. 236, ISBN 978-0-7864-4012-2 Warhol & Hackett 1989, p. 773Entry date: Thursday, September 25, 1986 "Jared Leto to play Andy Warhol in biopic". The Guardian. September 20, 2016. Archived from the original on September 21, 2016. Retrieved September 20, 2016. "TLA Releasing Unveils the past of Famed Artist Andy Warhol to Reveal a Story Few Ever Imagined in: Absolut Warhola" (PDF) (Press release). TLA Releasing. March 9, 2004. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 7, 2009. Retrieved January 9, 2009. Holden, Stephen (September 1, 2006). "A Portrait of the Artist as a Visionary, a Voyeur and a Brand-Name Star". The New York Times. Retrieved January 9, 2009. 66th Annual Peabody Awards Archived July 12, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, May 2007. "My Andy Warhol—Videos". Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved December 4, 2013. Welcome to the Silver Factory at IMDb [better source needed] "Andy Warhol's "Factory People"". PlanetGroupEntertainment. Archived from the original on December 11, 2013. Retrieved December 4, 2013. D'Addario, Daniel (March 8, 2022). "'The Andy Warhol Diaries' Summons the Genius, and the Person, Behind the Image: TV Review". Variety. Retrieved March 20, 2022. "Martin Scorsese's Vinyl Is the Year's First Must-See Show". February 9, 2016. Archived from the original on March 19, 2016. Retrieved March 21, 2016. Strause, Jackie (October 18, 2017). "How Lena Dunham and 'American Horror Story' Delivered a Timely Look at Feminism". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 13, 2021. Cass, Richard Benjamin (December 14, 2015). Braniff Airways Flying Colors (1st ed.). Arcadia Publishing, Inc. p. 74. ISBN 978-1-4671-3440-8. Archived from the original on December 21, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Sante, Lucy (May 3, 2020). "Andy Warhol, Superstar". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 7, 2020. Retrieved May 8, 2020. Hughes, Kathryn (February 22, 2020). "Warhol by Blake Gopnik review – sex, religion and overtaking Picasso". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved May 8, 2020. Alexander, Paul (April 17, 2020). "'Warhol' paints the Pop Art icon as the most influential artist of the 20th century". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 11, 2020. Retrieved May 8, 2020. Alan Moore (w), John Totleben (a). "Olympus" Miracleman, no. 16 (December 1989). Eclipse Comics. Neil Gaiman (w), Mark Buckingham (a). "Notes From The Underground" Miracleman, no. 19 (November 1990). Eclipse Comics. King, Darryn. "Manon Gage On Playing Marissa Marcel In 'Immortality'". Forbes. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Faber, Tom (September 6, 2022). "Immortality review — a compelling, cinematic mystery video game". Financial Times. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "A symposium on Pop Art". Arts Magazine, April 1963, pp. 36–45. The symposium was held in 1962, at The Museum of Modern Art, and published in this issue the following year. Bockris, Victor (1997). Warhol: The Biography. New York: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81272-9. Celant, Germano. Andy Warhol: A Factory. Kunstmuseum Wolfsbug, 1999. ISBN 978-3-7757-0773-2 Colacello, Bob (1990). Holy Terror: Andy Warhol Close Up. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-016419-5. Danto, Arthur C. (2009). Andy Warhol. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-13555-8. Dillenberger, Jane D. (2001). The Religious Art of Andy Warhol. New York: Continuum International Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-8264-1334-5. Archived from the original on May 11, 2015. Retrieved January 5, 2016. Doyle, Jennifer, Jonathan Flatley, and José Esteban Muñoz, eds (1996). Pop Out: Queer Warhol. Durham: Duke University Press. Duncan Fallowell, 20th Century Characters, ch. Andy Lives (London, Vintage, 1994) Foster, Hal (1996). The Return of the Real. An October Book, MIT Press. Garrels, Gary (1989). The Work of Andy Warhol: Discussions in Contemporary Culture, no. 3. Beacon NY: Dia Art Foundation. Guiles, Fred Lawrence (1989). Loner at the Ball: The Life of Andy Warhol. New York: Bantam. ISBN 978-0-593-01540-7. James, James, "Andy Warhol: The Producer as Author", in Allegories of Cinema: American Film in the 1960s (1989), pp. 58–84. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Koestenbaum, Wayne (2003). Andy Warhol. New York: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-670-03000-2. Krauss, Rosalind E. "Warhol's Abstract Spectacle". In Abstraction, Gesture, Ecriture: Paintings from the Daros Collection. New York: Scalo, 1999, pp. 123–33. Lippard, Lucy R., Pop Art, Thames and Hudson, 1970 (1985 reprint), ISBN 978-0-500-20052-0 Livingstone, Marco; Dan Cameron; Royal Academy (1992). Pop art: an international perspective. New York: Rizzoli. ISBN 978-0-8478-1475-6. Michelson, Annette (2001). Andy Warhol (October Files). Cambridge MA: The MIT Press. Scherman, Tony, & David Dalton, POP: The Genius of Andy Warhol, New York, NY: HarperCollins, 2009 Suarez, Juan Antonio (1996). Bike Boys, Drag Queens, & Superstars: Avant-Garde, Mass Culture, and Gay Identities in the 1960s Underground Cinema. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. Watson, Steven (2003). Factory Made: Warhol and the 1960s. New York: Pantheon. ISBN 978-0-679-42372-0. Archived from the original on August 29, 2010. Warhol, Andy (1975). The Philosophy of Andy Warhol: (From A to B and Back Again). Hardcore Brace Jovanovich. ISBN 978-0-15-189050-7. Warhol, Andy; Hackett, Pat (1980). POPism: The Warhol Sixties. Hardcore Brace Jovanovich. ISBN 978-0-15-173095-7. Warhol, Andy; Hackett, Pat (1989). The Andy Warhol Diaries. Warner Books. ISBN 978-0-446-39138-2. Yau, John (1993). In the Realm of Appearances: The Art of Andy Warhol. Hopewell, NJ: Ecco Press. ISBN 978-0-88001-298-0. Andy Warhol at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote 49 artworks by or after Andy Warhol at the Art UK site Andy Warhol at the National Gallery of Art Warhol Foundation in New York City Andy Warhol Collection in Pittsburgh The work of Andy Warhol spoken about by David Cronenberg Warholstars: Andy Warhol Films, Art and Superstars Warhol & The Computer Andy Warhol biography A Piece of Work podcast, WNYC Studios/MoMA, Tavi Gevinson and Abbi Jacobson discuss Andy Warhol's Campbell's Soup Cans Andy Warhol's Personal Book Shelf