The Four Seasons (Italian: Le quattro stagioni) is a group of four violin concerti by Italian composer Antonio Vivaldi, each of which gives musical expression to a season of the year. These were composed around 1718–1720, when Vivaldi was the court chapel master in Mantua. They were published in 1725 in Amsterdam, together with eight additional concerti, as Il cimento dell'armonia e dell'inventione (The Contest Between Harmony and Invention). The Four Seasons is the best known of Vivaldi's works. Though three of the concerti are wholly original, the first, "Spring", borrows patterns from a sinfonia in the first act of Vivaldi's contemporaneous opera Il Giustino. The inspiration for the concertos is not the countryside around Mantua, as initially supposed, where Vivaldi was living at the time, since according to Karl Heller they could have been written as early as 1716–1717, while Vivaldi was engaged with the court of Mantua only in 1718. They were a revolution in musical conception: Vivaldi represented flowing creeks, singing birds (of different species, each specifically characterized), a shepherd and his barking dog, buzzing flies, storms, drunken dancers, hunting parties from both the hunters' and the prey's point of view, frozen landscapes, and warm winter fires. Unusually for the period, Vivaldi published the concerti with accompanying sonnets (possibly written by the composer himself) that elucidated what it was in the spirit of each season that his music was intended to evoke. The concerti therefore stand as one of the earliest and most detailed examples of what would come to be called program music—in other words, music with a narrative element. Vivaldi took great pains to relate his music to the texts of the poems, translating the poetic lines themselves directly into the music on the page. For example, in the middle section of "Spring", when the goatherd sleeps, his barking dog can be heard in the viola section. The music is elsewhere similarly evocative of other natural sounds. Vivaldi divided each concerto into three movements (fast–slow–fast), and, likewise, each linked sonnet into three sections. Vivaldi's arrangement is as follows: Concerto No. 1 in E major, Op. 8, RV 269, "Spring" (La primavera) Allegro (in E major) Largo e pianissimo sempre (in C♯ minor) Allegro pastorale (in E major) Concerto No. 2 in G minor, Op. 8, RV 315, "Summer" (L'estate) Allegro non molto (in G minor) Adagio e piano – Presto e forte (in G minor) Presto (in G minor) Concerto No. 3 in F major, Op. 8, RV 293, "Autumn" (L'autunno) Allegro (in F major) Adagio molto (in D minor) Allegro (in F major) Concerto No. 4 in F minor, Op. 8, RV 297, "Winter" (L'inverno) Allegro non molto (in F minor) Largo (in E♭ major) Allegro (in F minor) "L'inverno" (Winter), First movement, Allegro non molto (3:18) Performed by the United States Air Force Band Problems playing this file? See media help. A performance of all four concerti may take about 40–43 minutes. Approximate timings of the individual concerti: Spring: 10 minutes Summer: 11 minutes Autumn: 11 minutes Winter: 9 minutes Concerto No. 1 in E major, "La primavera" (Spring) I. Allegro II. Largo III. Allegro Problems playing these files? See media help. Concerto No. 2 in G minor, "L'estate" (Summer) I. Allegro non molto II. Adagio III. Presto Concerto No. 3 in F major, "L'autunno" (Autumn) I. Allegro II. Adagio molto III. Allegro Concerto No. 4 in F minor, "L'inverno" (Winter) I. Allegro non molto II. Largo III. Allegro All performed by the Wichita State University Chamber Players, an ensemble of the Wichita Symphony Orchestra There is some debate as to whether the four concertos were written to accompany four sonnets or vice versa. Though it is not known who wrote the accompanying sonnets, the theory that Vivaldi wrote them is supported by the fact that each sonnet is broken into three sections, each neatly corresponding to a movement in the concerto. Regardless of the sonnets' authorship, The Four Seasons can be classified as program music, instrumental music intended to evoke something extra-musical, and an art form which Vivaldi was determined to prove sophisticated enough to be taken seriously. In addition to these sonnets, Vivaldi provided instructions such as "The barking dog" (in the second movement of "Spring"), "Languor caused by the heat" (in the first movement of "Summer"), and "the drunkards have fallen asleep" (in the second movement of "Autumn"). A new translation of the sonnets into English by Armand D'Angour was published in 2019. The date and personnel on the first recording of The Four Seasons are disputed. There is a compact disc of a recording made by the violinist Alfredo Campoli taken from acetates of a French radio broadcast; these are thought to date from early in 1939. The first proper electrical recording was made in 1942 by Bernardino Molinari; though his is a somewhat different interpretation from modern performances, it is clearly recognisable as The Four Seasons. Molinari's recording was made for Cetra, and was issued in Italy and subsequently in the United States on six double-sided 78s, in the 1940s. It was then reissued on long-playing album in 1950, and, later, on compact disc. The first American recording was made in the final week of 1947 by the violinist Louis Kaufman. The recording was made at Carnegie Hall in advance of a scheduled recording ban effective 1 January 1948. The performers were The Concert Hall Chamber Orchestra under Henry Swoboda, Edith Weiss-Mann (harpsichord) and Edouard Nies-Berger (organ). This recording helped the re-popularisation of Vivaldi's music in the mainstream repertoire of Europe and America following on the work done by Molinari and others in Italy. It won the French Grand Prix du Disque in 1950, was elected to the Grammy Hall of Fame in 2002, and was selected the following year for the National Recording Registry in the Library of Congress. Kaufman, intrigued to learn that the four concertos were in fact part of a set of twelve, set about finding a full score and eventually recorded the other eight concertos in Zürich in 1950, making his the first recording of Vivaldi's complete Op. 8. The ensemble I Musici recorded The Four Seasons several times, the debut recording in 1955 with Felix Ayo; a 1959 recording featuring Ayo again; and subsequent recordings featuring Roberto Michelucci (1969), Pina Carmirelli (1982), Federico Agostini (1990), and Mariana Sîrbu (1995). There is also a video recording of The Four Seasons performed by I Musici in Antonio Vivaldi's hometown of Venice, filmed by Anton van Munster in 1988. The 1969 Argo recording by the Academy of St. Martin-in-the-Fields conducted by Neville Marriner and featuring the soloist Alan Loveday sold over half a million copies; it became the ensemble's first gold record. I Solisti di Zagreb, under the baton of Antonio Janigro with Jan Tomasow as violin soloist and Anton Heiller on harpsichord, followed in 1957 on the Vanguard label, further reissued under the Philips and other labels. Wilfrid Mellers, an English music critic, musicologist and composer wrote of this performance, "the soloists phrase their lyricism beautifully."[citation needed] John Thornton wrote about this recording, "Here is matchless ensemble playing, topped by Tomasow's secure playing. Janigro reveals his talent for conducting, which competes with his considerable talent for cello playing." Ivan Supek wrote of this recording: I will attempt to convey to you how much this performance means to me, and might mean to you, as well. My first encounter with the records took place almost thirty years ago, when "our" Antonio revealed to me the true significance of the piece of another great Antonio, his famous namesake, whose Le Quattro Staggioni I could hardly listen any more because of the "grand", actually too grand, performances usual at that time, let alone enjoy them. What a change it was – a window into a new world; music is fast, precise and true to life, the intonation is correct, the continuo appropriate, and the violin of beautiful sound in fitting correlation with the Zagreb Soloists. The self-assured and fine tone of Jan Tomasow's solo violin relates perfectly with the Soloists; the entire performance is impregnated with the spirit of Janigro's perfectionism, leaving the music and its soul fully exposed. It had been for a long time the only performance I could listen to. Only during [the] last decade some new kids, playing authentic instruments, have offered to me similar pleasure and insights into the music of Antonio Vivaldi and, to my great pleasure, Janigro's performance is no longer the only choice for me. In my opinion, this also shows how Janigro's performance in cooperation with the Zagreb Soloists was far ahead its time, as corroborated by Igor Stravinsky, who claimed that it was the most beautiful performance of Le Quattro Staggioni he had ever heard, a statement which I only recently learned about. No wonder, since such “bareness” and precision of Janigro's interpretation must have appealed to him. It was much later that I discovered the excellence of the recording as well. At that time, the Zagreb Soloists were recording for Vanguard, mostly in Vienna at various locations, and this particular recording was made in 1957 at Rotenturmstrassaal. Recording was produced by Seymour Solomon, chief producer of the entire edition, who would personally come from the USA to oversee every recording to be made by the Zagreb Soloists, whereas the Vanguard branch in Vienna "Amadeo" was in charge of the organisation. (My gratitude to one of the founders of the Zagreb Soloists, Mr. Stjepan Aranjoš, for providing me with some important insights). Janigro was a perfectionist, often rather merciless, not only in matters of music but also in terms of the sound, so he participated directly and intensely in [the] recording process, which was quite uncommon at that time. All that great care, by all participants in the project, is amply reflected in the recording itself, resulting in an airy performance of appropriate spaciousness and extension, with only occasional “congestion” of high tones in forte sections. Paul Shoemaker wrote about this recording: Nothing I have heard changes my view that the best Seasons ever was performed by Jan Tomasow and I Solisti di Zagreb and beautifully recorded by Vanguard at the very beginning of the stereo era. If you have almost every other version of the Seasons, you’ll want this one, too. If money and space are no obstacle, it might be worth having. Nigel Kennedy's 1989 recording of The Four Seasons with the English Chamber Orchestra sold over three million copies worldwide, becoming one of the best-selling classical works ever. The marketing of Kennedy's record was described as "the first time that a classical artist had been given the full pop marketing treatment", with a promotional single, and advertisements on billboards, TV and radio. Gil Shaham and the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra recorded The Four Seasons as well as a music video for the first movement of "Winter" that was featured regularly on The Weather Channel in the mid-1990s. Surround sound versions of the piece have been issued on Super Audio CD by Richard Tognetti, Pinchas Zukerman, Jonathan Carney and Rachel Podger. The World's Encyclopedia of Recorded Music in 1952 cites only two recordings of The Four Seasons – by Molinari and Kaufman. By 2011[update], approximately 1,000 recorded versions have been made since Campoli's in 1939.[citation needed] In 2009, all four concertos were arranged for piano by pianist Jeffrey Biegel, who then recorded them the same year for the Naxos label. It is available in Europe and the United States as a CD. Classical musicians have sought to distinguish their recordings of The Four Seasons, with historically informed performances, and embellishments, to the point of varying the instruments and tempi, or playing notes differently from the listener's expectation (whether specified by the composer or not). It is said that Vivaldi's work presents such opportunities for improvisation. Many period-based ensembles have recorded The Four Seasons, including La Serenissima under the direction of Adrian Chandler who recorded the Manchester version of The Four Seasons, The English Concert under the direction of Trevor Pinnock, the Academy of Ancient Music under the direction of Christopher Hogwood and Europa Galante under the direction of Fabio Biondi. The Four Seasons was voted #67 in the Classic FM Hall of Fame. Three of the four concerti were included in the Classic 100 Concerto listing. Derivative works of these concerti include arrangements, transcriptions, covers, remixes, samples, and parodies in music — themes in theater and opera, soundtracks in films (or video games), and choreography in ballet (along with contemporary dance, figure skating, rhythmic gymnastics, synchronized swimming, etc.) — either in their entirety, single movements, or medleys. Antonio Vivaldi appears to have started this trend of adapting music from The Four Seasons, and since then it has expanded into many aspects of the performing arts (as have other instrumental & vocal works by the composer). This contest between harmony and invention (as it were) now involves various genres around the world: 1726 (or 1734) Vivaldi re-scored the Allegro movement from the "Spring" concerto, both as the opening sinfonia (third movement), and chorus (adding lyrics) for his opera Dorilla in Tempe. J. S. Bach used the theme of the first movement of the "Spring" concerto for the third movement (aria) of his cantata Wer weiß, wie nahe mir mein Ende? (BWV 27). 1727 (or 1730, 1731) Vivaldi based his setting of "Gelido in ogni vena", an aria from Metastasio's Siroe, re di Persia libretto, on the first movement of the "Winter" concerto. Vivaldi's Siroe, containing an aria on this text, premiered in 1727 (music lost). An aria on the "Gelido in ogni vena" text also appeared in his 1730 Argippo (music lost). In 1731, he inserted the extant version of this aria in his Farnace when this opera was restaged in Pavia. 1739 Nicolas Chédeville (France) arranged the concerti (as "Le printemps, ou Les saisons amusantes") for hurdy-gurdy or musette, violin, flute, and continuo. 1765 The French composer Michel Corrette composed and published a choral motet, Laudate Dominum de Coelis, subtitled Motet à Grand Chœur arrangé dans le Concerto de Printemps de Vivaldi. The work, for choir and orchestra, consists of the words of Psalm 148 set to the music from the Spring concerto with vocal soloists singing the solo concerto parts. 1775 Jean-Jacques Rousseau published his flute version of the "Spring" concerto. 1969 The Swingle Singers (France) recorded an album (The Joy of Singing) based on the work (and that of other composers). 1970 Astor Piazzolla (Argentina) published Estaciones Porteñas, "The Four Seasons of Buenos Aires"; these have been included in "eight seasons" performances, along with Vivaldi's work, by various artists. 1972 Moe Koffman (Canada) recorded a jazz album of the concerti. 1976 The New Koto Ensemble (Japan) recorded the concerti on koto instruments. 1978 Michael Franks (United States) composed a vocal serenade based on the theme of the Adagio from the "Summer" concerto. This was subsequently covered by WoongSan (Korea) in 2010. 1981 The Four Seasons is used in the eponymous 1981 film, along with other Vivaldi concertos for flute. 1982 Patrick Gleeson (United States) recorded a "computer realization" of the concerti. 1984 Thomas Wilbrandt (West Germany) composed and recorded "The Electric V" (later adapted for film), which interprets Vivaldi's work with ambient electronics, vocals, and samples of the original concerti. Roland Petit (France) choreographed a ballet (entitled "Les Quatre Saisons") to an I Musici performance of Vivaldi's work. 1987 Ben Shedd (United States) produced a scenic tour of nature with the concerti as background music (narrated by William Shatner). 1990 A MIDI arrangement of the "Spring" concerto by Passport Designs was included with Windows 3.0. 1993 Jean-Pierre Rampal (France) recorded arrangements of the concerti for flute; these were also recorded by Jadwiga Kotnowska. 1995 Arnie Roth (United States) recorded "The Four Seasons Suite", including sonnets (recited by Patrick Stewart). This may not qualify as a derivative work, depending on whether Vivaldi's translated sonnets were meant to be narrated with the music (versus being read in Italian, or silently by the audience). 1997 The Baronics (Canada) recorded surf guitar versions of one movement from each of the concerti. French musician Jacques Loussier composed and recorded, with his trio, jazz-swing interpretations of the concerti. 1998 The Great Kat (England/United States) recorded a shred guitar (and violin) version of the Presto movement from the "Summer" concerto. Vanessa-Mae (Singapore/Britain) recorded a crossover version of the same movement for electric violin. 1999 The Chinese Baroque Players recorded arrangements of the concerti for traditional Chinese instruments. Petrova & Tikhonov (Russia) performed their long program to a medley of Vivaldi's seasons to win the European Figure Skating Championships. 2000 Venice Harp Quartet (Italy) recorded arrangements of the concerti for harp ensemble. Gustavo Montesano (Argentina) recorded a tango guitar version of the "Spring" Allegro with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra. Jochen Brusch (Germany) & Sven-Ingvart Mikkelsen (Denmark) recorded arrangements of the concerti for violin and organ. 2001 Bond (Australia/Britain) recorded two singles based on the "Winter" concerto, with electric strings (violin, cello, viola), vocals, and electronic beats. They similarly interpreted a movement from each season for Peugeot car advertisements (2009).[citation needed] Ferhan & Ferzan Önder (Turkish twin sisters) recorded a transcription of the concerti for two pianos by Antun Tomislav Šaban. BanYa (South Korea) recorded a dance version of the "Winter" concerto for the Pump It Up video game.[citation needed] Susan Osborn (United States) recorded a new-age vocal serenade based on the "Winter" Largo. The Charades (Finland) recorded the Presto from the "Summer" concerto as "Summer Twist", for surf guitar ensemble. An electronic cover of the same movement was recorded by Takayuki Ishikawa (under the pseudonym dj TAKA) with the title "V" for the rhythm game Beatmania IIDX 5th Style. The song has become one of the most popular in the series, being included in every release since its debut.[citation needed] 2003 Red Priest (UK) recorded arrangements of the concerti for recorder. Hayley Westenra (New Zealand) adapted the "Winter" concerto into a song titled "River of Dreams" which is sung in English. It was recorded for her Pure album on July 10. 2004 Tafelmusik (Canada) arranged a cross-cultural arts special based on the concerti, involving a Chinese pipa, Indian sarangi and Inuit throat-singing. 2005 Mỹ Linh (Vietnamese singer) adapted the "Winter" concerto into a song titled "Mùa Đông" (which means "winter" also) on her album Chat với Mozart (Chat with Mozart).[citation needed] Dark Moor (Spain) recorded an electric-guitar version of the Allegro non molto movement from the "Winter" concerto; this was later integrated into the Finnish video game Frets on Fire. 2006 Juliette Pochin (Wales) performed on her debut album an operatic suite of sonnets set to the concerti.[citation needed] Accentus chamber choir (France) recorded a choral version of the "Winter" concerto. Stéphane Lambiel (Switzerland) performed his long program to a medley of the concerti to win the World Figure Skating Championships.[citation needed] 2007 Celtic Woman (Ireland) recorded the "Winter" Largo with vocals (Italian lyrics). The youngest former member, Chloë Agnew, originally recorded it for her Walking in the Air album which was released in 2002.[citation needed] PercaDu (Israel) performed an arrangement of the Allegro non molto movement from the "Winter" concerto, for marimbas with chamber orchestra. Mauro Bigonzetti (Italy) choreographed a ballet of the concerti for a French-Canadian dance company. Tim Slade (Australia) directed 4, a documentary which follows four classical violinists in their homelands (of Tokyo; Thursday Island, New York; and Lapland), as they relate to Vivaldi's Four Seasons. Seoul Metropolitan Traditional Music Orchestra performed the concerti with arrangement for Korean traditional music (gugak) orchestra by Seong-gi Kim. It was recorded live and released with CD from Synnara Music same year. 2008 Sveceny & Dvorak (Czech Republic) produced both an album and stage production of world music based on the concerti. Yves Custeau (Canada) recorded a rock & roll "one-man band" version of the "Spring" Allegro. Daisy Jopling (England/United States) recorded a violin & hip-hop version of the Allegro non molto movement from the "Winter" concerto, and also performs it reggae-style. Innesa Tymochko (Ukraine) performed her crossover version of the Presto from the "Summer" concerto, for violin. Wez Bolton (Isle of Man) recorded a cover version of the Allegro non molto movement from the "Winter" concerto, based on the Japanese video game "Beatmania" remix. Patrick Chan (Canada) performed his long program to a medley of the concerti to win the Canadian Figure Skating Championships. 2009 Absynth Against Anguish (Romania) produced an electronic (trance) version of the concerti. Riccardo Arrighini (Italy) recorded the concerti for solo piano, in a jazz style. Christophe Monniot recorded ambient-jazz interpretations of the concerti. Christian Blind (France) recorded a surf guitar/acid rock version of the Allegro movement from the "Spring" concerto. Sodagreen (Taiwan) launched their "Vivaldi Project" which resulted in a series of pop albums based on the concerti: Spring/Daylight, Summer/Fever, Autumn/Story and Winter/Endless. The project was completed in 2015 with the release of the fourth album.[citation needed] 2010 Art Color Ballet (Poland) performed their "4 elements" show to the Presto movement from the "Summer" concerto, arranged by Hadrian Filip Tabęcki (Kameleon). David Garrett (Germany) recorded a crossover version of Vivaldi's winter (allegro non molto), combining classical violin with modern rock music. 2011 Black Smith (Russia) performed the Presto movement from the "Summer" concerto in the style of thrash metal music (likewise, this movement has been covered numerous times by aspiring electric guitar virtuosos, and other crossover musicians). Angels (Greece) performed their crossover version of the same movement, scored for electric strings. Szentpeteri Csilla (Hungary) performed her crossover version of the same movement, scored for piano. Leonel Valbom (Portugal) remixed the Presto movement from the "Summer" concerto with VST Synths. Tim Kliphuis (Netherlands) performed the Allegro from the "Spring" movement as a crossover of world-music styles. Niibori Guitar Ensemble (Japan) Performed the Presto from the "Summer" movement as a arrangement for their concert at the Minato Mirai Hall on 1 June 2011 2012 Russian violinist Olga Kholodnaya and Argentinian drummer Marino Colina arranged and recorded live in Berlin a version for violin and drum kit. German-born British composer Max Richter created a postmodern and minimalist recomposition, Recomposed by Max Richter: Vivaldi – The Four Seasons. Working with solo violinist Daniel Hope, Richter discarded around 75 per cent of the original source material; the album is 44 minutes long. Aura (Japan) recorded an a cappella arrangement of the concerti, and had also performed Vivaldi's Spring chorus (from Dorilla in Tempe) on a prior album. Sinfonity (Spain) performed the concerti for "electric-guitar orchestra". Bachod Chirmof (USA) produced a MIDI recording & animation of Vivaldi's winter (movements I & III). Tornado Classic (Russia) performed the Presto movement from the "Summer" concerto, with electric guitar and slap bass. The symphonic rock band Trans-Siberian Orchestra used a portion of the first movement of the "Winter" concerto in their song "Dreams of Fireflies (On A Christmas Night)" on their Dreams of Fireflies EP.[citation needed] 2013 Richard Galliano (France) recorded the concerti for accordion, as well as a few of his opera arias on the instrument. Vito Paternoster (Italy) recorded the concerti in the form of sonatas for cello. Periodic (Germany) produced a megamix of the concerti, which incorporates electronica with samples of a classical recording. Steven Buchanan (USA) produced a tetralogy of "midseasons" (slow movements and corresponding sonnets) from Vivaldi's program music. William Harvey (USA) conducts the Afghan Youth Orchestra, the primary ensemble of Afghanistan National Institute of Music, in his composition "The Four Seasons of Afghanistan" at the Kennedy Center and Carnegie Hall. 2014 The Piano Guys (USA) recorded an arrangement for piano and cello, a crossover between the "Winter" concerto and "Let it Go" from the computer-animated film Frozen. Along with the original composition of "Winter" included in Fantasia: Music Evolved, there are also two mixes: the "Alt Rock" mix, and the "Steve Porter" mix.[citation needed] 2015 Nihad Hrustanbegovic (The Netherlands) recorded the concerti for solo accordion on Zefir Records.[citation needed] Zozimo Rech and Adrianne Simioni (Brazil) recorded the concerti on electric and acoustic guitar on the Astronomusic label. Lupe Fiasco's songs "Summer", "Fall", "Winter", & "Spring" on his album Tetsuo & Youth reference the concerti.[citation needed] Justin Bird (New Zealand) transcribed the concerti for solo piano.[failed verification] In April, violist David Aaron Carpenter recorded the concerti, arranged for viola and released with an arrangement of Piazzolla's Estaciones Porteñas and The Four Seasons of Manhattan by Alexey Shor. 2019 "For Seasons" is a recomposition of Vivaldi's concertos using algorithms to portray climate change from 1725 to 2019. Arranged by Simone Candotto and performed in November 2019 by the NDR Elbphilharomie Orchestra, under the direction of Alan Gilbert. Portrait of a Lady on Fire used La Serenissima's Four Seasons as part of their film soundtrack. Winter is used in John Wick: Chapter 3 – Parabellum during the assault in the Continental by Zero and his students 2021 Ballet Arizona performed original choreography by artistic director Ib Andersen in an outdoor performance set against the lush Southwest landscape of the Desert Botanical Gardens. "The [Uncertain] Four Seasons" is a reworking of Vivaldi's original, by both human composers and AI algorithms based on climate predictions for the year 2050. Each performance is modified to fit the climatic predictions for the location of performance. The project includes a multi-orchestra, streamed event planned for November 1, 2021, in connection with the United Nations Climate Change conference held in Glasgow, Scotland. It was inspired by the 2019 performance, "For Seasons." ATEEZ incorporated the "Summer" concerto into their cover of iKON's "Rhythm Ta" on Kingdom: Legendary War. 2022 The Brazilian telenovela Quanto Mais Vida, Melhor! covered the "Summer" concerto for a special sequence where the four main characters "switch bodies". For the scene, the compositions also had different rhythms involving rock, classical music, pop, and samba, respectively. Vivaldi and Italian Baroque specialists, La Serenissima (UK), "Winter" from the Manchester version of The Four Seasons was sampled in a Beats by Dre advertisement. The eponymous heroine of Wednesday plays Winter at the cello. (episode 3) 2023 Winter and Summer were also heard in the character Kafka's trailer from the game Honkai: Star Rail. Heller, Karl (1997). Antonio Vivaldi, The Red Priest of Venice. Portland, Oregon: Amadesu Press. pp. 171. ISBN 978-1-57467-015-8. Philip, Robert (2018). The Classical Music Lover's Companion to Orchestral Music. Yale University Press. p. 875. ISBN 9780300120691. Everett, Paul (1996). Vivaldi: The Four Seasons and Other Concertos, Op. 8. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 76. ISBN 978-0521404990. Christine Lee Gengaro. "Program notes: Four Seasons". Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra. Archived from the original on 15 July 2012. Andrew Mellor Sinfini Music (2013-03-14). "The secret behind the Four Seasons". Sinfini Music. Retrieved 2014-08-24. "Vivaldi's Four Sonnets" by Armand D'Angour Pearl GEMM CD 9151 Two versions are available, one with more extensive sleeve notes giving the political background and history of the work's rediscovery issued by Ermitage ERC CD 12006-2. Bowling, Lance. "8.110297-98 – VIVALDI: 12 Violin Concertos, Op. 8 / The 4 Seasons (Kaufman) (1947, 1950)". Naxos Records. Retrieved 27 October 2018. Jeremy Eichler (2005-02-27). "The Masterpiece That Took 200 Years to Become Timeless". The New York Times. Retrieved 2018-01-06. Concert Hall Records, CHS. set AR; reissued on Naxos Historical 8.110297-98. #CHS.CHC 1064 (#Nix.CLP 1061-1/2) Vivaldi – The Four Seasons (Complete) on YouTube Andrew Clements (2016-10-04). "Neville Marriner – ten of his best recordings". The Guardian. Retrieved 2018-01-06. Thornton, John (October 1958). "Stereo Disc Reviews" (PDF). HiFi/Stereo Review. 1 (9): 88 – via vintagevacuumaudio.com. Antonio Janigro – WAM[full citation needed] Web(UK), Music on the. "Vivaldi – The Ultimate Four Seasons [PS]: Classical CD Reviews- April 2003 MusicWeb(UK)". www.musicweb-international.com. Brunning, John (3 September 2014). "How Nigel Kennedy changed classical music forever". Classic FM. Archived from the original on 2014-09-05. Retrieved 2014-09-05. Wright, Steve (23 August 1999). "Not quite Vivaldi: Nigel Kennedy remembers Hendrix". CNN. Performing Vivaldi, Interview with Nemanja Radulovic, featured on YouTube (recording artist's channel) Performing Vivaldi, Interview with Aisslinn Nosky, featured on YouTube (producer's channel). RISM 212006277 Spáčilová, Jana (2013). "Brněnská opera Argippo z roku 1733 ve světle nových výzkumů". Opus musicum (in Czech). 13 (2). Brno: 9. ISSN 0862-8505. Spáčilová, Jana (2014). "Unbekannte Brünner Oratorien Neapolitanischer Komponisten vor 1740". Musicologica Brunensia (in German). 49 (1). Brno: Faculty of Arts of the Masaryk University: 143. doi:10.5817/MB2014-1-9. hdl:11222.digilib/130209. ISSN 1212-0391. Hopkins, Translated by Bill (1970). Antonio Vivaldi; his life and work. Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 87. ISBN 978-0-520-01629-3. Jean-Jacques Rousseau Le Printems de Vivaldi arrangé pour une Flute sans accompagnement. Paris: Bignon, 1775. Le Printemps de Vivaldi Archived 2021-01-25 at the Wayback Machine at www.dolcimelo.com Moe Koffman "The Four Seasons", GRT or Derby record label, Discogs listing. New Koto Ensemble "Koto Four Seasons", Discogs listing. Michael Franks, "Vivaldi's song", "Burchfield Nines" album. WoongSan, "Vivaldi's Song", album "Close Your Eyes" (Pony Canyon label). Ben Shedd, "Seasons", listed on IMDB; trailer featured on Vimeo (photagrapher's channel). Flute "Jean-Pierre Rampal Plays Vivaldi's Four Seasons", Sony Classical (53105), Allmusic listing. Arnie Roth, "The Compleat Four Seasons", listed on Allmusic. The Baronics "Get Bach!", on Discogs. The Great Kat, "Bloody Vivaldi", album. Vanessa-Mae "Storm", album. Chinese Baroque Players "Four Seasons", Xien Records (XNC2 44032), Allmusic listing Venice Harp Quartet "Four Seasons for Four Harps", Fine Classics (4423–2), Allmusic listing. Primavera Tango "Flamenco Fantasy", on Discogs. Brusch & Mikkelsen "The Four Seasons", Classico CLASSCD333 Ferhan & Ferzan discography "Vivaldi Reflections" Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine, EMI classics. Retrieved on 23 June 2013. Susan Osborn, "Winter/Vivaldi", album "Still Life" (Pony Canyon label). The Charades, "Vivaldi's Summer Twist", album "As Hot As Cool Can Be" (Power Records). Red Priest's "Four Seasons" (Dorian 90317), Allmusic listing. "The Four Seasons Mosaic" DVD is paired with Tafelmusik's L'estro armonico CD, featured on Vimeo (producer's channel). Frets on Fire "Dark Moor's winter", featured on YouTube (open source gameplay recording). Accentus "Transcriptions 2", on Discogs. Celtic Woman: A New Journey, "Vivaldi's Rain". PercaDu (Tomer Yariv and Adi Morag), "Vivaldi, winter arr for marimbas", featured on YouTube (recording artist's channel). LesGrandsBallets "Les quatre saisons", featured on YouTube (producer's channel). Tim Slade "4", listed on IMDB. Information about CD "국악으로 듣는 비발디의 사계 (in Korean)", on Aladin Communication Inc. Jaroslav Sveceny & Michal Dvorak "Vivaldianno MMVIII", featured on Vimeo (recording artist's channel). Yves Custeau "Vivaldi Rock Spring", featured on YouTube (recording artist's channel). Daisy Jopling, "Winter (hip hop)", album "Key to the Classics", "Winter (reggae)", featured on YouTube (recording artist's channel). Innesa Tymochko, "Vivaldi's Storm", featured on YouTube (recording artist's channel). Wez Bolton, "Winter (cover version)", featured on YouTube (recording artist's channel). Patrick Chan, "2008 Nationals", featured on YouTube (channel for the skater). Absynth Against Anguish "The Four Seasons 2.0", creative commons audio. Riccardo Arrighini, "Le quattro stagioni" Archived 2017-12-01 at the Wayback Machine, album "Vivaldi in Jazz". Christophe Monniot, "Vivaldi Universel, Saison 5", Cristal Records (CR 149). BlinDChriS "Vivaldi Dead Springs", creative commons media. Art Color Ballet "Vivaldi 4 Elements", featured on YouTube (producer's channel). David Garrett "Vivaldi/Vertigo", album "Rock Symphonies", featured on Vimeo (producer's channel). Black Smith "Vivaldi Tribute", Against all odds (DVD), featured on YouTube (recording artist's channel). Angels Ensembles, "Angels Summer", featured on YouTube (recording artist's channel). Szentpeteri Csilla, "Storm – Crossover", featured on YouTube (recording artist's channel). Leonel Valbom, "Summer Vivaldi", featured on SoundCloud (recording artist's channel). Tim Kliphuis "Spring – Gypsy Jazz and Celtic version", "Live at Iford Manor" (DVD), featured on YouTube (recording artist's channel). "「四季」より夏(新堀ｷﾞﾀｰｱﾝｻﾝﾌﾞﾙ) Niibori Guitar Ensemble playing The Four Seasons: Summer by NiiboriTV" "Night in Istanbul by Olga Show on Apple Music". iTunes. 23 August 2016. Retrieved 2017-03-08. "Save the Street Musicians by Olga Show on Apple Music". iTunes. 27 May 2016. Retrieved 2017-03-08. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: Marino Colina (2012-10-08), OLGA SHOW – SUMMER – VIVALDI – violin drums bass, retrieved 2017-03-08 Gill, Andy (27 October 2012). "Album: Max Richter, Vivaldi: The Four Seasons, Recomposed By Max Richter (Deutsche Grammophon)". Independent. London. Archived from the original on 2022-06-18. Retrieved 27 December 2012. Aura discography "Le Quattro Stagioni" Archived 2011-11-17 at the Wayback Machine, EPIC Records (ESCL 3932). Retrieved on 3 June 2013. Sinfonity "The Four Seasons", live in Madrid, featured on Vimeo (recording artist's channel). Bachod Chirmof, "Midi Animation – Vivaldi", featured on Vimeo (recording artist's channel). Tornado Classic, "Vivaldi Summer", featured on Vimeo (producer's channel). Richard Galliano, DG Label "Vivaldi" Archived 2013-07-06 at the Wayback Machine (featured on artist's site). Vito Paternoster "The Four Seasons in forma di sonata for cello" ("Baryton BRT 006", tracks featured on Magnatune). The Periodic project & Lennart Wittenhagen "Vier Jahreszeiten", featured on Vimeo (recording artist's channel). A Vivaldi Compendium "Midseasons", creative commons media, featured on YouTube (producer's channel). ‘Bolero’ on Instruments Ravel Never Dreamed Of The Piano Guys – "Let it Go (Disney's "Frozen") Vivaldi Winter", featured on YouTube (group's channel). "The Four Seasons". www.astronomusic.com. "Le quattro stagioni (Vivaldi, Antonio) – IMSLP/Petrucci Music Library: Free Public Domain Sheet Music". imslp.org. Retrieved 2016-11-22. Carpenter, David Aaron (April 15, 2016). "Vivaldi, Piazzolla, Shor: The 12 Seasons". Warner Classics. "For Seasons". October 14, 2021. "The Four Seasons – A World Premiere". "The [uncertain] Four Seasons". October 14, 2021. [풀버전] ♬ 리듬 타 (The Awakening of Summer) – 에이티즈(ATEEZ), retrieved 2022-04-24 Quanto Mais Vida, Melhor! | Neném, Paula, Guilherme e Flávia acordam em corpos trocados e se desesperam | Globoplay (in Brazilian Portuguese), retrieved 2022-07-16 "The Four Seasons". La Serenissima. Retrieved 2022-11-04. Wikisource has original text related to this article: The Four Seasons Sonnets Media related to The Four Seasons (Vivaldi) at Wikimedia Commons The Four Seasons: Scores at the International Music Score Library Project Scores, Mutopia Project Portal:  Classical music