The East European Plain (also called the Russian Plain, or historically the Sarmatic Plain) is a vast interior plain extending east of the North European Plain, and comprising several plateaus stretching roughly from 25 degrees longitude eastward. It includes Volhynian-Podolian Upland on its westernmost fringe, the Central Russian Upland, and, on the eastern border, encompasses the Volga Upland. The plain includes also a series of major river basins such as the Dnepr Basin, the Oka–Don Lowland, and the Volga Basin. At the southeastern point of the East European Plain are the Caucasus and Crimean mountain ranges. Together with the North European Plain (covering much of Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, Germany and Poland), and covering the Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania), European Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, Moldova, southeastern Romania, and, at its southernmost point, the Danubian Plain in Northern Bulgaria (including Ludogorie and Southern Dobruja), it constitutes the majority of the Great European Plain (European Plain), the greatest mountain-free part of the European landscape. The plain spans approximately 4,000,000 km2 (2,000,000 sq mi) and averages about 170 m (560 ft) in elevation. The highest point of the plain, located in the Valdai Hills, is 346.9 metres (1,138.1 ft).[citation needed] West: Baltic Sea, Oder[citation needed] and Lusatian Neisse, Sudetenland,[citation needed] Carpathians[citation needed] (Outer Western Carpathians, Outer Eastern Carpathians, Southern Carpathians, Serbian Carpathians).[citation needed] South: Balkan Mountains, Black Sea, Crimean Mountains, Caucasus, The Caspian Sea and the Sea of Azov, Ustyurt Plateau. East: Ural Mountains and Turan Depression. North: White Sea, Barents Sea, Kara Sea, Scandinavian Mountains. Belarus Belarusian Ridge Polesia (Belarus, Ukraine) Bulgaria Danubian Plain (Bulgaria) (southern portion of the Lower Danubian Plane) Estonia Kazakhstan (European part) Latvia Lithuania Poland Roztocze Mazovian Lowland[citation needed] Romania / Moldova Moldavian Plateau (Moldova, Romania, Ukraine) Wallachian Plain (northern portion of the Lower Danubian Plane) Russia (European part) Timan Ridge Northern Ridge (Uvaly) Mari Depression Valdai Hills Smolensk–Moscow Upland (Russia, Belarus) Central Russian Upland (Russia, Ukraine) Oka–Don Lowland Volga Upland Obshchy Syrt Caspian Depression Ukraine Sian Lowland Volhynian-Podolian Upland Podolian Plateau Polesian Lowland Dnieper Upland Kyiv Mountains Central Upland Black Sea Lowland Azov Upland / Donets Ridge The following major landform features are within the East European Plain (listed generally from north to south). North Russian Lowlands Baltic Uplands[citation needed] Belarusian Ridge Kuma–Manych Depression Bugulma-Belebey Upland Vyatskie Uvaly Volga River Danube[citation needed] Ural River Vistula[citation needed] Dnieper River Don River (Russia) Pechora River Kama River Oka River Belaya River Daugava Neman River Pregolya River West Siberian Plain, the other major plain of Russia Explorers of Siberia Great Russian Regions European Plain at the Encyclopædia Britannica "Extending from eastern Poland through the entire European Russia to the Ural Mountaina, the East European Plain encompasses all of the Baltic states and Belarus, nearly all of Ukraine, and much of the European portion of Russia and reaches north into Finland." — Britannica. Podwysocki, Melvin H.; Earle, Janet L., eds. (1979). Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Basement Tectonics. Basement Tectonics Committee. p. 379. John F. Hoffecker (2002). Desolate Landscapes: Ice-Age Settlement in Eastern Europe. Rutgers University Press. pp. 15–21. ISBN 0813529921. Retrieved 17 May 2014. Marshall Cavendish (2010). World and Its Peoples. Volume 8 of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland. p. 1014. ISBN 978-0761478966. Retrieved 17 May 2014. Bolesław Augustowski Wielkie regiony naturalne Europy w: Antoni Wrzosek (red.) Geografia Powszechna. Tom III. Europa (bez ZSRR), Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warszawa 1965 Media related to East European Plain at Wikimedia Commons East European Plain at Ukrainian Soviet Encyclopedia East European Plain at Great Soviet Encyclopedia