.tr is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Turkey. It is administered by trABİS (under the Information and Communication Technologies Authority of Turkey) and managed by the Computer Center DNS Group of the ICT Authority. The domain was formerly administered by NIC.tr and managed by the Turkey Internet Society (the local chapter of ISOC) until September 2022. As of March 2017, around 15.53% of all the .tr domains were served via secured HTTPS protocol, with the Let's Encrypt Authority X3 being the most popular SSL certificate. Microsoft-IIS is the most popular web server, serving 35.31% of the .tr domains, followed by Apache serving 35.14% of the total .tr domains. nic.tr, formerly the official registry's domain, is one of the two second-level domains under this TLD. However, current registry TRABIS states that, restricted registrations directly at the second level will start one year after their incorporation date, which is 14 September 2022. ct.tr and nc.tr are the second level domain names of Northern Cyprus. Because Northern Cyprus is a unrecognised state, it does not have a top-level domain and uses .tr, the top-level domain name of Turkey. Infrastructure has been created for the future spread of the domain names, which only hosts the websites of some Turkish Cypriot state institutions. ct.tr hosts 33 websites, while nc.tr is never used except for two websites, one of which is a duplicate version of the Republican Assembly's ct.tr version. That has two versions: One that has https, which is expired, and one without it, which is faster than the ct.tr version. The other website is the searching feature of the Republican Assembly. Presidency of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus Prime Minister's Website The Republican Assembly (ct.tr) e-Devlet Turkish Cypriots Abroad Central Bank of Northern Cyprus Savings Deposit Insurance and Financial Stability Fund Credit Guarantee Fund Home Office Drug Enforcement Commission "Treasury Department". Archived from the original on 27 March 2024. Retrieved 27 March 2024. Department of Public Works and Transport Postal Department Telecommunication Department General Directorate of Police Police School Department Civil Aviation Department Immigration Department Directorate of the Labour Department Directorate of the Ports Department Ministry of Health Ministry of Foreign Affairs "Ministry of Tourism". Archived from the original on 4 March 2023. Retrieved 4 March 2023. Ministry of Labour and Social Security Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Ministry of Economy Public Information Office Public Service Commission Presidency Renewable Energy Resources Board Agricultural Research Institute Gazimağusa District Governate Security Forces Command Radio Güven Several third-level domains are present under .tr: gov.tr (reserved for the Government of Turkey and state institutions/organizations) mil.tr (reserved for the Turkish Armed Forces; retired in 2010 and replaced by tsk.tr) tsk.tr (reserved for the Turkish Armed Forces; used since 2010) k12.tr (reserved for schools approved by the Ministry of National Education) edu.tr (reserved for higher education institutions approved by the Council of Higher Education) av.tr (reserved for freelance lawyers, law firms and attorney partnerships) dr.tr (reserved for medical doctors, medical partnerships, hospitals, and healthcare services) bel.tr (reserved for provincial, district, and town municipal organizations and governments) pol.tr (reserved for the General Directorate of Security and police) kep.tr (reserved for Registered Electronic Mail Service Providers [KEPHS] authorized by the Information and Communication Technologies Authority) com.tr (intended for commercial entities) net.tr (reserved for network operators/providers, as well as internet-related access services such as portals, e-mail, etc.) org.tr (reserved for nonprofit entities such as foundations, associations, and non-governmental organizations) info.tr (intended for informational websites) bbs.tr (reserved for entities providing BBS services) nom.tr (reserved for individual/personal use) tv.tr (reserved for entities in the television industry) biz.tr (intended for commercial entities) tel.tr (reserved for use in connection with Turkish telephone numbers) gen.tr (general use) web.tr (general use) name.tr (reserved for individual/personal use) IANA .tr whois information Country code top-level domain Telecommunications in Turkey Internet in Turkey "İstatistikler". NIC.TR. Archived from the original on 12 March 2016. Retrieved 1 September 2021. "Türkiye internet istatistikleri. turmain.com". www.turmain.com (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 2 March 2017. Retrieved 1 March 2017. "Sıkça Sorulan Sorular". TRABİS - “tr” Ağ Bilgi Sistemi. 15 December 2022. Archived from the original on 21 November 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. "NicTR Closed". Nic.tr. 15 December 2022. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. ".tr". 6 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023 – via Wikipedia. v t e v t e