Abkhazia is a region in the Caucasus that is under the effective control of the partially recognised self-declared Republic of Abkhazia. The de jure majority internationally recognized Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia claims to be its legitimate government. The coat of arms of the Republic of Abkhazia was adopted by the Supreme Soviet of Abkhazia on 23 July 1992, after it unilaterally declared its secession from Georgia. The emblem of separatist Republic of Abkhazia is a shield divided vertically into white and green. On this are placed devices outlined in gold: At the base eight-pointed star, in the upper part of both the white and the green field are set two eight-pointed stars. At the centre of the shield is a horseman, flying on the fabulous steed called Arash, and shooting an arrow towards the stars. This scene is from the heroic epic Narts. Green symbolizes youth and life, while white symbolizes spirituality. The stars represent the sun, as well as the union of the East and West. The Government of the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia has adopted a seal which carries the name of the autonomous republic in Georgian and Abkhaz and depicts the House of the Government in Sukhumi. A coat of arms has been proposed for the Government of the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia by the State Council of Heraldry. These arms are quartered and depict an image of St George in the first quarter, the seven green and white stripes from the Abkhazia flag in the second and third quarters and the arms of the Shervashidze family in the fourth. Proposed coat of arms of the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia Coat of arms of the Principality of Abkhazia Emblem of the Socialist Soviet Republic of Abkhazia (1928-1931) Emblem of Abkhaz Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (1978-1992) Coat of arms of the SSR Abkhazia Flag of Abkhazia Article 10: Constitution of Abkhazia "On April 12, 2022, Session of the Government of the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia Held". Archived from the original on April 12, 2022. Retrieved May 9, 2022. "Heraldica". Heraldry.ge. Retrieved 29 June 2016. "Heraldica - რუქა". Flags of Abkhazia, Georgia v t e v t e