Shaquille Rashaun O'Neal (/ʃəˈkiːl/ shə-KEEL; born March 6, 1972), known commonly as Shaq (/ʃæk/ SHAK), is an American former professional basketball player who is a sports analyst on the television program Inside the NBA. He is a 7-foot-1-inch (2.16 m) and 325-pound (147 kg) center who played for six teams over his 19-year career in the National Basketball Association (NBA) and is a four-time NBA champion. O'Neal is regarded as one of the greatest basketball players and centers of all time. After playing college basketball for the LSU Tigers, O'Neal was drafted by the Orlando Magic with the first overall pick in the 1992 NBA draft. He quickly became one of the best centers in the league, winning Rookie of the Year in 1992–93 and leading his team to the 1995 NBA Finals. After four years with the Magic, O'Neal signed as a free agent with the Los Angeles Lakers. They won three consecutive championships in 2000, 2001, and 2002. Amid a feud between O'Neal and his teammate Kobe Bryant, O'Neal was traded to the Miami Heat in 2004, and his fourth NBA championship followed in 2006. Midway through the 2007–2008 season he was traded to the Phoenix Suns. After a season-and-a-half with the Suns, O'Neal was traded to the Cleveland Cavaliers in the 2009–10 season. O'Neal played for the Boston Celtics in the 2010–11 season before retiring. O'Neal's individual accolades include the 1999–2000 Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award; the 1992–93 NBA Rookie of the Year award; 15 All-Star Game selections, three All-Star Game MVP awards; three Finals MVP awards; two scoring titles; 14 All-NBA team selections, and three NBA All-Defensive Team selections. He is one of only three players to win NBA MVP, All-Star Game MVP and Finals MVP awards in the same year (2000); the other players are Willis Reed in 1970 and Michael Jordan in 1996 and 1998. He ranks 9th all-time in points scored, 6th in field goals, 15th in rebounds, and 8th in blocks. O'Neal was honored as one of the league's greatest players of all time by being named to the NBA 50th Anniversary Team in 1996. Due to his ability to dunk the basketball and score from close range, O'Neal also ranks third all-time in field goal percentage (58.2%) and led the league in field goal percentage ten times. O'Neal was elected into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2016. He was elected to the FIBA Hall of Fame in 2017. In October 2021, O'Neal was again honored as one of the league's greatest players of all time by being named to the NBA 75th Anniversary Team. In addition to his basketball career, O'Neal has released four rap albums, with his first, Shaq Diesel, going platinum. O'Neal is also an electronic music producer, and touring DJ, known as DIESEL. He has appeared in numerous films and has starred in his own reality shows, Shaq's Big Challenge and Shaq Vs. He hosts The Big Podcast with Shaq. He was a minority owner of the Sacramento Kings from 2013 to 2022 and is the general manager of Kings Guard Gaming of the NBA 2K League. O'Neal was born on March 6, 1972, in Newark, New Jersey, to Lucille O'Neal and Joe Toney, who played high school basketball (he was an All-State guard) and was offered a basketball scholarship to play at Seton Hall. Toney struggled with drug addiction and was imprisoned for drug possession when O'Neal was an infant. Upon his release, he did not resume a place in O'Neal's life and instead agreed to relinquish his parental rights to O'Neal's Jamaican stepfather, Phillip Arthur Harrison, a career Army sergeant. O'Neal remained estranged from his biological father for decades; O'Neal had not spoken with Toney or expressed an interest in establishing a relationship. On his 1994 rap album, Shaq Fu: The Return, O'Neal voiced his feelings of disdain for Toney in the song "Biological Didn't Bother", dismissing him with the line "Phil is my father." However, O'Neal's feelings toward Toney mellowed in the years following Harrison's death in 2013, and the two met for the first time in March 2016, with O'Neal telling him, "I don't hate you. I had a good life. I had Phil." O'Neal came from a tall family. His father and mother were 6 ft 1 in (1.85 m) and 6 ft 2 in (1.88 m) tall, respectively, and by age 13, O'Neal was already 6 ft 6 in (1.98 m) tall. He credited the Boys & Girls Clubs of America in Newark with giving him a safe place to play and keeping him off the streets. "It gave me something to do," he said. "I'd just go there to shoot. I didn't even play on a team." Because of his stepfather's career in the military, the family left Newark, moving to military bases in Germany and Texas. After returning from Germany, O'Neal's family settled in San Antonio, Texas. By age 16, O'Neal had grown to 6 ft 10 in (2.08 m), and he began playing basketball at Robert G. Cole High School. He led his team to a 68–1 record over two years and helped the team win the state championship during his senior year. His 791 rebounds during the 1989 season remains a state record for a player in any classification. O'Neal's tendency to make hook shots earned comparisons to Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, inspiring him to wear the same jersey number as Abdul-Jabbar, No. 33. However, his high school team did not have a 33 jersey, so O'Neal chose to wear No. 32 before college. After graduating from high school, O'Neal studied business at Louisiana State University (LSU). He had first met Tigers coach Dale Brown years earlier in Europe when O'Neal's stepfather was stationed on a U.S. Army base at Wildflecken, West Germany. While playing for Brown at LSU, O'Neal was a two-time All-American, two-time SEC Player of the Year, and received the Adolph Rupp Trophy as NCAA men's basketball player of the year in 1991; he was also named college player of the year by AP and UPI. O'Neal left LSU early to pursue his NBA career, but continued his education even after becoming a professional player. He was later inducted into the LSU Hall of Fame. A 900-pound (410 kg) bronze statue of O'Neal is located in front of the LSU Basketball Practice Facility. The Orlando Magic drafted O'Neal with the 1st overall pick in the 1992 NBA draft. In the summer before moving to Orlando, he spent time in Los Angeles under the tutelage of Hall of Famer Magic Johnson. O'Neal wore number 32 because Terry Catledge refused to relinquish the 33 jersey. O'Neal was named the Player of the Week in his first week in the NBA, the first player to do so. During his rookie season, O'Neal averaged 23.4 points on 56.2% shooting, 13.9 rebounds, and 3.5 blocks per game for the season. He was named the 1993 NBA Rookie of the Year and was the first rookie to be voted an All-Star starter since Michael Jordan in 1985. The Magic finished 41–41, winning 20 more games than the previous season, but missed the playoffs by virtue of a tie-breaker with the Indiana Pacers. On more than one occasion during the year, Sports Illustrated writer Jack McCallum overheard O'Neal saying, "We've got to get [head coach] Matty [Guokas] out of here and bring in [assistant] Brian [Hill]." In 1993–1994, O'Neal's second season, Hill was the coach and Guokas was reassigned to the front office. O'Neal improved his scoring average to 29.4 points (second in the league to David Robinson) while leading the NBA in field goal percentage at 60%. On November 20, 1993, against the New Jersey Nets, O'Neal registered the first triple-double of his career, recording 24 points to go along with career highs of 28 rebounds and 15 blocks. He was voted into the All-Star game and also made the All-NBA 3rd Team. Teamed with newly drafted Anfernee "Penny" Hardaway, the Magic finished with a record of 50–32 and made the playoffs for the first time in franchise history. In his first playoff series, O'Neal averaged 20.7 points and 13.3 rebounds[unreliable source] as the Pacers swept the Magic.[failed verification] In O'Neal's third season, 1994–95, he led the NBA in scoring with a 29.3 point average, while finishing second in MVP voting to David Robinson and entering his third straight All-Star Game along with Hardaway. They formed one of the league's top duos and helped Orlando to a 57–25 record and the Atlantic Division crown. The Magic won their first-ever playoff series against the Boston Celtics in the 1995 NBA Playoffs. They then defeated the Chicago Bulls in the conference semifinals. After beating Reggie Miller's Indiana Pacers, the Magic reached the NBA Finals, facing the defending NBA champion Houston Rockets. O'Neal played well in his first Finals appearance, averaging 28 points on 59.5% shooting, 12.5 rebounds, and 6.3 assists. Despite this, the Rockets, led by future Hall-of-Famers Hakeem Olajuwon and Clyde Drexler, swept the series in four games. O'Neal was injured for a great deal of the 1995–96 season, missing 28 games. He averaged 26.6 points and 11 rebounds per game, made the All-NBA 3rd Team, and played in his 4th All-Star Game. Despite O'Neal's injuries, the Magic finished with a regular season record of 60–22, second in the Eastern conference to the Chicago Bulls, who finished with an NBA record 72 wins. Orlando easily defeated the Detroit Pistons and the Atlanta Hawks in the first two rounds of the 1996 NBA Playoffs; however, they were no match for Jordan's Bulls, who swept them in the Eastern Conference finals. O'Neal became a free agent after the 1995–96 NBA season. In the summer of 1996, O'Neal was named to the United States Olympic basketball team, and was later part of the gold medal-winning team at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta. While the Olympic basketball team was training in Orlando, the Orlando Sentinel published a poll that asked whether the Magic should fire Hill if that were one of O'Neal's conditions for returning. 82% answered "no". O'Neal had a power struggle while playing under Hill. He said the team "just didn't respect [Hill]". Another question in the poll asked whether O'Neal was worth $115 million, in reference to the amount of the Magic's offer; 91.3% of the response said it was not. O'Neal's Olympic teammates teased him over the poll. He was also upset that the Orlando media implied O'Neal was not a good role model for having a child with his longtime girlfriend with no immediate plans to marry. O'Neal compared his lack of privacy in Orlando to "feeling like a big fish in a dried-up pond". He also learned that Hardaway considered himself the leader of the Magic and did not want O'Neal making more money than him. On the team's first full day at the Olympics in Atlanta, the media announced that O'Neal would join the Los Angeles Lakers on a seven-year, $121 million contract. O'Neal insisted he did not choose Los Angeles for the money; discussing the signing he referred to a couple of his product endorsements, saying: "I'm tired of hearing about money, money, money, money, money. I just want to play the game, drink Pepsi, wear Reebok." The Lakers won 56 games during the 1996–97 season. O'Neal averaged 26.2 points and 12.5 rebounds in his first season with Los Angeles; however, he again missed over 30 games due to injury. The Lakers made the playoffs, but were eliminated in the second round by the Utah Jazz in five games. In his first playoff game for the Lakers, O'Neal scored 46 points against the Portland Trail Blazers, the most for the Lakers in a playoff game since Jerry West had 53 in 1969. On December 17, 1996, O'Neal shoved Dennis Rodman of the Chicago Bulls; Rodman's teammates Scottie Pippen and Michael Jordan restrained Rodman and prevented further conflict. The Los Angeles Daily News reported that O'Neal was willing to be suspended for fighting Rodman, and O'Neal said: "It's one thing to talk tough and one thing to be tough." The following season, O'Neal averaged 28.3 points and 11.4 rebounds. He led the league with a 58.4 field goal percentage, the first of five consecutive seasons in which he did so. The Lakers finished the season 61–21, first in the Pacific Division, and were the second seed in the western conference during the 1998 NBA Playoffs. After defeating the Portland Trail Blazers and Seattle SuperSonics in the first two rounds, the Lakers again fell to the Jazz, this time in a 4–0 sweep. With the tandem of O'Neal and teenage superstar Kobe Bryant, expectations for the Lakers increased; however, personnel changes were a source of instability during the 1998–99 season. Long-time Laker point guard Nick Van Exel was traded to the Denver Nuggets; his former backcourt partner Eddie Jones was packaged with back-up center Elden Campbell for Glen Rice to satisfy a demand by O'Neal for a shooter. Coach Del Harris was fired, and former Lakers forward Kurt Rambis finished the season as head coach. The Lakers finished with a 31–19 record during the lockout-shortened season. Although they made the playoffs, they were swept by the San Antonio Spurs, led by Tim Duncan and David Robinson in the second round of the Western Conference playoffs. The Spurs would go on to win their first NBA title in 1999. In 1999, prior to the 1999–2000 season, the Lakers hired Phil Jackson as head coach, and the team's fortunes soon changed. Jackson immediately challenged O'Neal, telling him "the [NBA's] MVP trophy should be named after him when he retired." In the November 10, 1999, game against the Houston Rockets, O'Neal and Charles Barkley were ejected. After O'Neal blocked a layup by Barkley, O'Neal shoved Barkley, who then threw the ball at O'Neal. On March 6, 2000, O'Neal's 28th birthday, he scored a career-high 61 points to go along with 23 rebounds and 3 assists in a 123–103 win over the LA Clippers. O'Neal's 61-point game was the last game in NBA history that a player scored 60 or more points without hitting a 3-pointer until Giannis Antetokounmpo scored 64 points against the Indiana Pacers on December 13, 2023. O'Neal was also voted the 1999–2000 regular season Most Valuable Player, one vote short of becoming the first unanimous MVP in NBA history. Fred Hickman, then of CNN, instead chose Allen Iverson, then of the Philadelphia 76ers who would go on to win MVP the next season. O'Neal also won the scoring title while finishing second in rebounds and third in blocked shots. Jackson's influence resulted in a newfound commitment by O'Neal to defense, resulting in his first All-Defensive Team selection (second-team) in 2000. In the 2001 NBA Finals against the 76ers, O'Neal fouled out in Game 3 backing over Dikembe Mutombo, the 2000–2001 Defensive Player of the Year. "I didn't think the best defensive player in the game would be flopping like that. It's a shame that the referees buy into that", O'Neal said. "I wish he'd stand up and play me like a man instead of flopping and crying every time I back him down. A month before the 2001–02 season's training camp, O'Neal had corrective surgery for a claw toe deformity in the smallest toe of his left foot. He opted against a more involved surgery to return quicker. He was ready for the start of the 2001–02 regular season, but the toe frequently bothered him. In January 2002, he was involved in a spectacular on-court brawl in a game against the Chicago Bulls. He punched center Brad Miller after an intentional foul to prevent a basket, resulting in a melee with Miller, forward Charles Oakley, and several other players. O'Neal was suspended for three games without pay and fined $15,000. For the season, O'Neal averaged 27.2 points and 10.7 rebounds, excellent statistics but below his career average; he was less of a defensive force during the season. Matched up against the Sacramento Kings in the 2002 Western Conference finals, O'Neal said, "There is only one way to beat us. It starts with c and ends with t." O'Neal meant "cheat" in reference to the alleged flopping of Kings' center Vlade Divac. O'Neal referred to Divac as "she", and said he would never exaggerate contact to draw a foul. "I'm a guy with no talent who has gotten this way with hard work." After the 2001–2002 season, O'Neal told friends that he did not want another season of limping and being in virtually constant pain from his big right toe. His trademark mobility and explosion had been often absent. The corrective options ranged from reconstructive surgery on the toe to rehabilitation exercises with more shoe inserts and anti-inflammation medication. O'Neal was already wary of the long-term damage his frequent consumption of these medications might have. He did not want to rush a decision with his career potentially at risk. Using Jackson's triangle offense, O'Neal and Bryant enjoyed tremendous success, leading the Lakers to three consecutive titles (2000, 2001, and 2002). O'Neal was named MVP of the NBA Finals all three times and had the highest scoring average for a center in NBA Finals history. O'Neal missed the first 12 games of the 2002–03 season recovering from toe surgery. He was sidelined with hallux rigidus, a degenerative arthritis in his toe. He waited the whole summer until just before training camp for the surgery and explained, "I got hurt on company time, so I'll heal on company time." O'Neal debated whether to have a more invasive surgery that would have kept him out an additional three months, but he opted against the more involved procedure. The Lakers started the season with a record of 11–19. At the end of the season, the Lakers had fallen to the fifth seed and failed to reach the Finals in 2003. For the 2003–04 season, the team made a concerted off-season effort to improve its roster. They sought the free-agent services of two aging stars—forward Karl Malone and guard Gary Payton—but due to salary cap restrictions, could not offer either player nearly as much money as he could have made with some other teams. O'Neal assisted in the recruitment efforts and personally persuaded both men to join the squad, each forgoing larger salaries in favor of a chance to win an NBA championship. At the beginning of the 2003–04 season, O'Neal wanted a contract extension with a pay raise on his remaining three years for $30 million. The Lakers had hoped O'Neal would take less money due to his age, physical conditioning, and games missed due to injuries. During a preseason game, O'Neal had yelled at Lakers owner Jerry Buss, "Pay me." There had been increasing tension between O'Neal and Bryant. The feud climaxed during training camp prior to the 2003–2004 season when Bryant, in an interview with ESPN journalist Jim Gray, criticized O'Neal for being out of shape, a poor leader, and putting his salary demands over the best interest of the team. The Lakers made the playoffs in 2004 and lost to the Detroit Pistons in the 2004 NBA Finals. Lakers assistant coach Tex Winter said, "Shaq defeated himself against Detroit. He played way too passively. He had one big game ... He's always interested in being a scorer, but he hasn't had nearly enough concentration on defense and rebounding". After the series, O'Neal was angered by comments made by Lakers general manager Mitch Kupchak regarding O'Neal's future with the club, as well as by the departure of Lakers coach Phil Jackson at the request of Buss. O'Neal made comments indicating that he felt the team's decisions were centered on a desire to appease Bryant to the exclusion of all other concerns, and O'Neal promptly demanded a trade. Kupchak wanted the Dallas Mavericks' Dirk Nowitzki in return but Mavericks owner Mark Cuban refused to let his 7-footer go. However, Miami showed interest, and eventually the two clubs agreed on a trade. Winter said, "[O'Neal] left because he couldn't get what he wanted—a huge pay raise. There was no way ownership could give him what he wanted. Shaq's demands held the franchise hostage, and the way he went about it didn't please the owner too much." On July 14, 2004, O'Neal was traded to the Miami Heat for Caron Butler, Lamar Odom, Brian Grant, and a future first-round draft choice (the Lakers used the draft choice to select Jordan Farmar in the 2006 draft). O'Neal reverted from (his Lakers jersey) number 34 to number 32, which he had worn while playing for the Magic. Upon signing with the Heat, O'Neal promised the fans that he would bring a championship to Miami. He claimed one of the main reasons for wanting to be traded to Miami was because of their up-and-coming star Dwyane Wade, to whom he gave the nickname "Flash". With O'Neal on board, the new-look Heat surpassed expectations, claiming the best record in the Eastern Conference in 2004–05 with 59 wins. He played in 73 games, his most since 2001 season, averaged 22.9 points a game along with 10.4 rebounds and 2.3 blocks. O'Neal made his 12th consecutive All-Star Team, made the All-NBA 1st Team, and won the Eastern Conference Player of the Month award for his performance in March. O'Neal also narrowly lost the 2004–05 MVP Award to Phoenix Suns guard Steve Nash in one of the closest votes in NBA history. Despite being hobbled by a deep thigh bruise, O'Neal led the Heat to the Eastern Conference finals and a game 7 against the defending champion Detroit Pistons, losing by a narrow margin. Afterwards, O'Neal and others criticized Heat head coach Stan Van Gundy for not calling enough plays for O'Neal. In August 2005, O'Neal signed a 5-year-extension with the Heat for $100 million. Supporters applauded O'Neal's willingness to take what amounted to a pay cut and the Heat's decision to secure O'Neal's services for the long term. They contended that O'Neal was worth more than $20 million per year, particularly given that lesser players earned almost the same amount. In the second game of the 2005–06 season, O'Neal injured his right ankle and subsequently missed the following 18 games. Upon O'Neal's return, Van Gundy resigned, citing family reasons, and Pat Riley assumed head coach responsibilities. O'Neal later referred to Van Gundy as a "frontrunner" and a "master of panic." Many critics stated that Heat coach Riley correctly managed O'Neal during the rest of the season, limiting his minutes to a career low. Riley felt doing so would allow O'Neal to be healthier and fresher come playoff time. Although O'Neal averaged career lows (or near-lows) in points, rebounds, and blocks, he said in an interview "Stats don't matter. I care about winning, not stats. If I score 0 points and we win I'm happy. If I score 50, 60 points, break the records, and we lose, I'm pissed off. 'Cause I knew I did something wrong. I'll have a hell of a season if I win the championship and average 20 points a game." During the 2005–06 season, the Heat recorded only a .500 record without O'Neal in the line-up. On April 11, 2006, O'Neal recorded his second career triple-double against the Toronto Raptors with 15 points, 11 rebounds and a career-high 10 assists. O'Neal finished the 2005–06 season as the league leader in field goal percentage. In the 2006 NBA Playoffs, the Heat first faced the younger Chicago Bulls, and O'Neal delivered a dominating 27 point, 16 rebound and 5 blocks performance in game 1 followed by a 22-point effort in game 2 to help Miami take a 2–0 lead in the series. Chicago would respond with two dominating performances at home to tie the series, but Miami would respond right back with a victory at home in game 5. Miami returned to Chicago and closed out the series in the 6th game, highlighted by another dominating performance by O'Neal who finished with 30 points and 20 rebounds. Miami advanced to face New Jersey, who won a surprising game 1 victory before the Heat won four straight to assure a rematch with Detroit. The Pistons had no answer for Wade throughout the series, while O'Neal delivered 21 points and 12 rebounds in game 3 followed by 27 points and 12 boards in game 4 to help Miami take a 3–1 series lead. The Pistons would win game 5 in Detroit, and Wade would once again get injured, but the Heat held on to win game 6 with O'Neal scoring 28 points with 16 rebounds and 5 blocks to help Miami reach their first-ever NBA Finals. In the Finals, the Heat were underdogs against the Dallas Mavericks led by Dirk Nowitzki, and the Mavericks won the first two games at home in dominating fashion. The Heat led by Wade and a balanced effort by O'Neal, Antoine Walker and Jason Williams would go on to win all three of the next games at home, before closing out the series in Dallas to deliver the first NBA title for the franchise and O'Neal's fourth title. With Wade carrying the offensive load, O'Neal did not need to have a dominating series, and finished with an average of 13.7 points and 10.2 rebounds for the series. In the 2006–07 season, O'Neal missed 35 games after an injury to his left knee in November required surgery. After one of those missed games, a Christmas Day match-up against the Lakers, he ripped Jackson, who O'Neal had once called a second father, referring to his former coach as "Benedict Arnold". Jackson had previously said, "The only person I've ever [coached] that hasn't been a worker... is probably Shaq." The Heat struggled during O'Neal's absence, but with his return won seven of their next eight games. Bad luck still haunted the squad, however, as Wade dislocated his left shoulder, leaving O'Neal as the focus of the team. Critics doubted that O'Neal, now in his mid-30s, could carry the team into the playoffs. The Heat went on a winning streak that kept them in the race for a playoff spot, which they finally secured against the Cleveland Cavaliers on April 5. In a rematch of the year before, the Heat faced the Bulls in the first round of the 2006–07 NBA playoffs. The Heat struggled against the Bulls and although O'Neal put up reasonable numbers, he was not able to dominate the series. The Bulls swept the Heat, the first time in 50 years a defending NBA champion was swept in the opening round. It was the first time in 13 years that O'Neal did not advance into the second round. In the 2006–07 season O'Neal reached 25,000 career points, becoming the 14th player in NBA history to accomplish that milestone. However, it was the first season in O'Neal's career that his scoring average dropped below 20 points per game. O'Neal experienced a rough start for the 2007–08 season, averaging career lows in points, rebounds, and blocks. His role in the offense diminished, as he attempted only 10 field goals per game, versus his career average of 17. In addition, O'Neal was plagued by fouls, and during one stretch fouled out of five consecutive games. O'Neal's streak of 14 straight All-Star appearances ended that season. O'Neal again missed games due to injuries, and the Heat had a 15–game losing streak. According to O'Neal, Riley thought he was faking the injury. During a practice in February 2008, O'Neal got into an altercation with Riley over the coach ordering a tardy Jason Williams to leave practice. The two argued face-to-face, with O'Neal poking Riley in the chest and Riley slapping his finger away. Riley soon after decided to trade O'Neal. O'Neal said his relationship with Wade was not "all that good" by the time he left Miami, but he did not express disappointment at Wade for failing to stand up for him. O'Neal played 33 games for the Miami Heat in the 2007–08 season prior to being traded to the Phoenix Suns. O'Neal started all 33 games and averaged 14.2 points per game. Following the trade to Phoenix, O'Neal averaged 12.9 points while starting all 28 games with the Suns. The Phoenix Suns acquired O'Neal in February 2008 from the league-worst Miami Heat, who had a record at the time of the trade of 9–37, in exchange for Shawn Marion and Marcus Banks. O'Neal made his Suns debut on February 20, 2008, against his former Lakers team, scoring 15 points and grabbing 9 rebounds in the process. The Lakers won, 130–124. O'Neal was upbeat in a post-game press conference, stating: "I will take the blame for this loss because I wasn't in tune with the guys [...] But give me four or five days to really get in tune and I'll get it." In 28 regular season games, O'Neal averaged 12.9 points and 10.6 rebounds, good enough to make the playoffs. One of the reasons for the trade was to limit Tim Duncan in the event of a postseason matchup between the Suns and the San Antonio Spurs, especially after the Suns' six-game elimination by the Spurs in the 2007 NBA Playoffs. O'Neal and the Phoenix Suns did face the Spurs in the first round of the playoffs, but they were once again eliminated, in five games. O'Neal averaged 15.2 points, 9.2 rebounds and 1.0 assists per game. O'Neal preferred his new situation with the Suns over the Heat. "I love playing for this coach and I love playing with these guys", O'Neal said. "We have professionals who know what to do. No one is asking me to play with [his former Heat teammates] Chris Quinn or Ricky Davis. I'm actually on a team again." Riley felt O'Neal was wrong for maligning his former teammates. O'Neal responded with an expletive toward Riley, whom he often referred to as the "great Pat Riley" while playing for the Heat. O'Neal credited the Suns training staff with prolonging his career. They connected his arthritic toe, which would not bend, to the alteration of his jump that consequently was straining his leg. The trainers had him concentrate on building his core strength, flexibility, and balance. The 2008–09 season improved for O'Neal, who averaged 18 points, 9 rebounds, and 1.6 blocks through the first half (41 games) of the season, leading the Suns to a 23–18 record and 2nd place in their division. He returned to the All-Star Game in 2009 and emerged as co-MVP along with ex-teammate Kobe Bryant. On February 27, 2009, O'Neal scored 45 points and grabbed 11 rebounds, his 49th career 40-point game, beating the Toronto Raptors 133–113. In a matchup against Orlando on March 3, 2009, O'Neal was outscored by Magic center Dwight Howard, 21–19. "I'm really too old to be trying to outscore 18-year-olds", O'Neal said, referring to the then 23-year-old Howard. "It's not really my role anymore." O'Neal was double-teamed most of the night. "I like to play people one-on-one. My whole career I had to play people one-on-one. Never once had to double or ask for a double. But it's cool", said O'Neal. During the game, O'Neal flopped against Howard. Magic coach Stan Van Gundy, who had coached O'Neal with the Heat, was "very disappointed cause [O'Neal] knows what it's like. Let's stand up and play like men, and I think our guy did that tonight." O'Neal responded, "Flopping is playing like that your whole career. I was trying to take the charge, trying to get a call. It probably was a flop, but flopping is the wrong use of words. Flopping would describe his coaching." Mark Madsen, a Lakers teammate of O'Neal's for three years, found it amusing since "everyone in the league tries to flop on Shaq and Shaq never flops back." In a 2006 interview in TIME, O'Neal said if he were NBA commissioner, he would "Make a guy have to beat a guy—not flop and get calls and be nice to the referees and kiss ass." On March 6, O'Neal talked about the upcoming game against the Rockets and Yao Ming. "It's not going to be man-on-man, so don't even try that," says O'Neal with an incredulous laugh. "They're going to double and triple me like everybody else ... I rarely get to play [Yao] one-on-one ... But when I play him (on defense), it's just going to be me down there. So don't try to make it a Yao versus Shaq thing, when it's Shaq versus four other guys." The 2009 NBA Playoffs was also the first time since O'Neal's rookie season in 1992–93 that he did not participate in the playoffs. He was named as a member of the All-NBA Third Team. The Suns notified O'Neal he might be traded to cut costs. On June 25, 2009, O'Neal was traded to the Cleveland Cavaliers for Ben Wallace, Sasha Pavlovic, $500,000, and a 2010 second-round draft pick. Upon arriving in Cleveland, O'Neal said, "My motto is very simple: Win a Ring for the King", referring to LeBron James. James was the leader of the team, and O'Neal deferred to him. On February 25, 2010, O'Neal suffered a severe right thumb injury while attempting to go up for a shot against Glen Davis of the Boston Celtics. He had surgery on the thumb on March 1 and returned to play in time for the first round of the playoffs. After defeating the Chicago Bulls in the first round, the Cavaliers went on to lose to the Boston Celtics in the second round. In September 2016, O'Neal said: "When I was in Cleveland, we were in first place. Big Baby [Glen Davis] breaks my hand and I had to sit out five weeks late in the year. I come back finally in the first round of the playoffs, and we lost to Boston in the second round. I was upset. I know for a fact if I was healthy, we would have gotten it done that year and won a ring." O'Neal averaged career lows in almost every major statistical category during the 2009–10 season, largely due to splitting Center duties with Zydrunas Ilgauskas. Upon hearing Bryant comment that he had more rings than O'Neal, Wyc Grousbeck, principal owner of the Celtics, saw an opportunity to acquire O'Neal. Celtics coach Doc Rivers agreed to the signing on the condition that O'Neal would not receive preferential treatment, nor could he cause any locker room problems like in Los Angeles or Miami. On August 4, 2010, the Celtics announced that they had signed O'Neal. The contract was for two years at the veteran minimum salary for a total contract value of $2.8 million. O'Neal wanted the larger mid-level exception contract, but the Celtics chose instead to give it to Jermaine O'Neal. The Atlanta Hawks and the Dallas Mavericks also expressed interest but had stalled on O'Neal's salary demands. He was introduced by the Celtics on August 10, 2010, and chose the number 36. O'Neal said he did not "compete with little guys who run around dominating the ball, throwing up 30 shots a night—like D–Wade, Kobe." O'Neal added that he was only competing against Duncan: "If Tim Duncan gets five rings, then that gives some writer the chance to say 'Duncan is the best,' and I can't have that." Publicly, he insisted he did not care whether he started or substituted for the Celtics, but expected to be part of the second unit. Privately, he wanted to start, but kept it to himself. O'Neal missed games throughout the season due to an assortment of ailments to his right leg including knee, calf, hip, and Achilles injuries. The Celtics traded away center Kendrick Perkins in February partially due to the expectation that O'Neal would return to fill Perkins' role. The Celtics were 33–10 in games Perkins had missed during the year due to injury, and they were 19–3 in games that O'Neal played over 20 minutes. After requesting a cortisone shot, O'Neal returned April 3 after missing 27 games due to his Achilles; he played only five minutes due to a strained right calf. It was the last regular season game he would play that year. O'Neal missed the first round of the 2011 playoffs. He insisted on more cortisone shots and returned in the second round, but he was limited to 12 minutes in two games as the Heat eliminated the Celtics from the playoffs. On June 1, 2011, O'Neal announced his retirement via social media. On a short video on Twitter, O'Neal tweeted, "We did it. Nineteen years, baby. I want to thank you very much. That's why I'm telling you first. I'm about to retire. Love you. Talk to you soon." On June 3, 2011, O'Neal held a press conference at his home in Orlando to officially announce his retirement. While in college, O'Neal was considered for the Dream Team to fill the college spot, but it eventually went to future teammate Christian Laettner. His national team career began in the 1994 FIBA World Championship in which he was named MVP of the Tournament. While he led the Dream Team II to the gold medal with an 8–0 record, O'Neal averaged 18 points and 8.5 rebounds and recorded two double-doubles. In four games, he scored more than 20 points. Before 2010, he was the last active American player to have a gold from the FIBA World Cup. He was one of two players (the other being Reggie Miller) from the 1994 roster to be also named to the Dream Team III. Due to more star-power, he rotated with Hakeem Olajuwon and David Robinson and started 3 games. He averaged 9.3 points and 5.3 rebounds with 8 total blocks. Again, a perfect 8–0 record landed him another gold medal at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta. O'Neal was upset that coach Lenny Wilkens played Robinson more minutes in the final game; Wilkens previously explained to O'Neal that it would probably be Robinson's last Olympics. After his 1996 experience, he declined to play in international competition. He was angered by being overlooked for the 1999 FIBA AmeriCup squad, saying it was a "lack of respect". He forwent an opportunity to participate in the 2000 Olympics, explaining that two gold medals were enough. O'Neal also chose not to play in the 2002 FIBA World Championship. He rejected an offer to play in the 2004 Olympics, and although he was initially interested in being named for 2006–2008 US preliminary roster, he eventually declined the invitation. O'Neal established himself as an overpowering low post presence, putting up career averages of 23.7 points on .582 field goal accuracy, 10.9 rebounds and 2.3 blocks per game. At 7 ft 1 in (2.16 m), 330 lb (150 kg) and U.S. shoe size 23, he became famous for his physical stature. His physical frame gave him a power advantage over most opponents. On two occasions during his first season in the NBA, his powerful dunks broke the steel backboard supports, prompting the league to increase the brace strength and stability of the backboards for the following 1993–94 season. O'Neal's "drop step", (called the "Black Tornado" by O'Neal) in which he posted up a defender, turned around and, using his elbows for leverage, powered past him for a very high-percentage slam dunk, proved an effective offensive weapon. In addition, O'Neal frequently used a right-handed jump hook shot to score near the basket. The ability to dunk contributed to his career field goal accuracy of .582, second only to Artis Gilmore as the highest field goal percentage of all time. He led the NBA in field goal percentage 10 times, breaking Wilt Chamberlain's record of nine. Opposing teams often used up many fouls on O'Neal, reducing the playing time of their own big men. O'Neal's imposing physical presence inside the paint caused dramatic changes in many teams' offensive and defensive strategies. O'Neal's primary weakness was his free throw shooting, with a career average of 52.7%. He once missed all 11 of his free throw attempts in a game against the Seattle SuperSonics on December 8, 2000, a record. O'Neal believes his free throw woes were a mental issue, as he often shot 80 percent in practice. In hope of exploiting O'Neal's poor foul shooting, opponents often committed intentional fouls against him, a tactic known as "Hack-a-Shaq". O'Neal was the third-ranked player all-time in free throws taken, having attempted 11,252 free-throws in 1,207 games up to and including the 2010–11 season. On December 25, 2008, O'Neal missed his 5,000th free throw, becoming the second player in NBA history to do so, along with Chamberlain. O'Neal only made one three-point shot during his entire career. He made the shot during the 1995–96 NBA season with the Orlando Magic. His career three-point-shot record is 1 for 22 (a 4.5% career percentage). O'Neal was a capable defender, named three times to the All-NBA Second Defensive Team. His presence intimidated opposing players shooting near the basket, and he averaged 2.3 blocked shots per game over the course of his career. Phil Jackson believed O'Neal underachieved in his career, saying he "could and should have been the MVP player for 10 consecutive seasons." In 2022, to commemorate the NBA's 75th Anniversary The Athletic ranked their top 75 players of all time, and named O'Neal as the 8th greatest player in NBA history. The Lakers retired his No. 34 jersey on April 2, 2013. On February 26, 2016, the Miami Heat announced that it would retire O'Neal's No. 32 jersey during the 2016–17 season, making O'Neal one of just 32 athletes in American professional sports history to have their jersey retired by multiple teams. The Heat eventually retired his jersey on December 22, 2016, during halftime of a game against his former team, the Los Angeles Lakers. On February 13, 2024, the Orlando Magic retired O'Neal's No. 32 jersey, the first time they retired a players' number. He became the third player to have his number retired by three NBA teams, joining Wilt Chamberlain and Pete Maravich. O'Neal called himself "The Big Aristotle" and "Hobo Master" for his composure and insights during interviews. Journalists and others gave O'Neal several nicknames, including "Shaq", "The Diesel", "Shaq Fu", "The Big Daddy", "Superman", "The Big Agave", "The Big Cactus", "The Big Shaqtus", "The Big Galactus", "Wilt Chamberneezy", "The Big Baryshnikov", "The Real Deal", "The Big Shamrock", "The Big Leprechaun", "Shaqovic", and "The Big Conductor". Although he was a favorite interviewee of the press, O'Neal was sensitive and often went weeks without speaking. When he did not want to speak with the press, he employed an interview technique whereby, sitting in front of his cubicle, he would murmur in his low-pitched voice. During the 2000 Screen Actors Guild strike, O'Neal performed in a commercial for Disney. O'Neal was fined by the union for crossing the picket line. O'Neal's humorous and sometimes incendiary comments fueled the Los Angeles Lakers' long-standing rivalry with the Sacramento Kings; O'Neal frequently referred to the Sacramento team as the "Queens". During the 2002 victory parade, O'Neal declared that Sacramento would never be the capital of California, after the Lakers beat the Kings in a tough seven-game series en route to its third championship with O'Neal. He also received media flak for mocking Chinese people when interviewed about newcomer center Yao Ming. O'Neal told a reporter, "you tell Yao Ming, ching chong yang, wah, ah so." O'Neal later said it was locker room humor and he meant no offense. Yao believed that O'Neal was joking, but he said many Asians wouldn't see the humor. Yao joked, "Chinese is hard to learn. I had trouble with it when I was little." O'Neal later expressed regret for the way he treated Yao early in his career. During the 2005 NBA playoffs, O'Neal compared his poor play to Erick Dampier, a Dallas Mavericks center who had failed to score a single point in one of their recent games. The quip inspired countless citations and references by announcers during those playoffs, though Dampier himself offered little response to the insult. The two would meet in the 2006 NBA Finals. O'Neal was very vocal with the media, often making jabs at former Laker teammate Kobe Bryant. In the summer of 2005, when asked about Bryant, he responded, "I'm sorry, who?" and continued to pretend that he did not know who Bryant was until well into the 2005–06 season. O'Neal also appeared on television on Saturday Night Live (he was initially picked to host the second episode of season 24 in 1998, but had to back down due to scheduling conflicts, being replaced by Kelsey Grammer; however, he did appear in two sketches during the episode) and in 2007 hosted Shaq's Big Challenge, a reality show on ABC in which he challenged Florida kids to lose weight and stay in shape. When the Lakers faced the Heat on January 16, 2006, O'Neal and Bryant made headlines by engaging in handshakes and hugs before the game, an event that was believed to signify the end of the so-called "Bryant–O'Neal feud" that had festered since O'Neal left Los Angeles. O'Neal was quoted as saying that he accepted the advice of NBA legend Bill Russell to make peace with Bryant. On June 22, 2008, O'Neal freestyled a diss rap about Bryant in a New York club. While rapping, O'Neal blamed Bryant for his divorce from his wife Shaunie and claims to have received a vasectomy, as part of a rhyme. He also taunted Bryant for not being able to win a championship without him. O'Neal led the audience to mockingly chant several times "Kobe, tell me how my ass tastes". O'Neal justified his act by saying "I was freestyling. That's all. It was all done in fun. Nothing serious whatsoever. That is what MCs do. They freestyle when called upon. I'm totally cool with Kobe. No issue at all." Although even other exponents of hip hop, such as Snoop Dogg, Nas and Cory Gunz, agreed with O'Neal, Maricopa County, Arizona Sheriff Joe Arpaio expressed his intention to relieve O'Neal of his Maricopa County sheriff posse badge, due to "use of a racially derogatory word and other foul language". The racial quote from his song was "it's like a white boy trying to be more nigga than me." Beginning in 1993, O'Neal began to compose rap music. He released five studio albums and 1 compilation album. Although his rapping abilities were criticized at the outset, one critic credited him with "progressing as a rapper in small steps, not leaps and bounds". His 1993 debut album, Shaq Diesel, received platinum certification from the RIAA. O'Neal was featured alongside Michael Jackson as a guest rapper on "2 Bad", a song from Jackson's 1995 album HIStory. He contributed three tracks, including the song "We Genie", to the Kazaam soundtrack. O'Neal was also featured in Aaron Carter's 2001 hit single "That's How I Beat Shaq". Shaq also appears in the music video for the release. Shaquille O'Neal conducted the Boston Pops Orchestra at the Boston Symphony Hall on December 20, 2010. O'Neal also started DJing in the 1980s at LSU. Currently, O'Neal produces electronic dance music and tours the world under the stage name DJ Diesel. In July 2017, O'Neal released a diss track aimed at LaVar Ball, the father of NBA point guard Lonzo Ball. The three-minute song was released in response to Ball claiming him and his younger son LaMelo, would beat O'Neal and his son Shareef in a game of basketball. On October 23, 2021, O'Neal performed as DJ Diesel on the bassPOD stage at the 2021 Electric Daisy Carnival in Las Vegas, Nevada. On June 7, 2023, O'Neal released his first single as DJ Diesel from his debut album Gorilla Warfare, titled "Bang Your Head" in collaboration with Hairitage. The album was released on August 18. O'Neal left LSU for the NBA after three years. However, he promised his mother he would eventually return to his studies and complete his bachelor's degree. He fulfilled that promise in 2000, earning his B.A. degree in general studies from LSU, with a minor in political science. Coach Phil Jackson let O'Neal miss a home game so he could attend graduation. At the ceremony, he told the crowd "now I can go and get a real job". Subsequently, O'Neal earned an online MBA degree through the University of Phoenix in 2005. In reference to his completion of his MBA degree, he stated: "It's just something to have on my resume for when I go back into reality. Someday I might have to put down a basketball and have a regular 9-to-5 like everybody else." Toward the end of his playing career, he began work on an educational doctorate at Barry University. His doctoral capstone topic was "The Duality of Humor and Aggression in Leadership Styles". O'Neal received his Ed.D. degree in Human Resource Development from Barry in 2012. O'Neal told a reporter for ABC News that he plans to further his education by attending law school. In 2009, O'Neal attended the Sportscaster U. training camp at S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University, saying "You have to know what you're doing... I needed to learn the secrets". O'Neal has also studied directing and cinematography with the New York Film Academy's Filmmaking Conservatory. O'Neal maintained a high level of interest in the workings of police departments and became personally involved in law enforcement. O'Neal went through the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Reserve Academy and became a reserve officer with the Los Angeles Port Police. On March 2, 2005, O'Neal was given an honorary U.S. Deputy Marshal title and named the spokesman for the Safe Surfin' Foundation; he served an honorary role on the task force of the same name, which tracks down sexual predators who target children on the Internet. Upon his trade to Miami, O'Neal began training to become a Miami Beach reserve officer. On December 8, 2005, he was sworn in, but elected for a private ceremony to avoid distracting attention from the other officers. He assumed a $1-per-year salary in this capacity. Shortly thereafter, in Miami, O'Neal witnessed a hate crime (assaulting a man while calling out homophobic slurs) and called Miami-Dade police, describing the suspect and helping police, over his cell phone, track the offender. O'Neal's actions resulted in the arrest of two suspects on charges of aggravated battery, assault, and a hate crime. In September 2006, O'Neal took part in a raid on a home in rural Bedford County, Virginia. O'Neal had been made an "honorary deputy" by the local sheriff's department. O'Neal was not qualified as a SWAT officer. In June 2008, the Bedford County, Virginia, and Maricopa County, Arizona, sheriff departments revoked O'Neal's special deputyship after a video surfaced of him rapping about Kobe Bryant and using racial slurs. On January 20, 2015, O'Neal was sworn in as a reserve officer for Doral, Florida's police force. In December 2016, O'Neal was sworn in as a sheriff's deputy in Jonesboro, Georgia, as part of Clayton County, Georgia Sheriff's Department. O'Neal holds the county record of Tallest Sheriff's Deputy. Starting with Blue Chips and Kazaam, O'Neal appeared in films that were panned by some critics. O'Neal is one of the first African Americans to portray a major comic book superhero in a motion picture, having starred as John Henry Irons, the protagonist in the 1997 film Steel. He is preceded only by Michael Jai White, whose film Spawn was released two weeks before Steel. O'Neal appeared as himself on an episode of Curb Your Enthusiasm, bedridden after Larry David's character accidentally tripped him while stretching, and in two episodes each of My Wife and Kids and The Parkers. He appeared in cameo roles in the films Freddy Got Fingered, Jack and Jill and Scary Movie 4. O'Neal appeared in the 311 music video for the hit single "You Wouldn't Believe" in 2001, in P. Diddy's video for "Bad Boy for Life", the video for Aaron Carter's "That's How I Beat Shaq", the video for Owl City's "Vanilla Twilight" and the video for Maroon 5's "Don't Wanna Know". O'Neal appeared in the movie CB4 in a small "interviewing" scene. O'Neal appeared in a SportsCenter commercial dressed in his Miami police uniform, rescuing Mike the Tiger from a tree. O'Neal reportedly wanted a role in X2 (2003), the second installment of the X-Men film series, but was ignored by the filmmakers. O'Neal appeared as Officer Fluzoo in the comedy sequel Grown Ups 2. He voiced animated versions of himself on several occasions, including in the animated series Static Shock (2002; episode "Static Shaq"), in Johnny Bravo (1997; episode "Back on Shaq"), in Uncle Grandpa (2014; episode "Perfect Kid"), and in The Lego Movie (2014). He also had a voice over role in the 2013 film The Smurfs 2. O'Neal was featured on the covers of video games NBA Live 96, NBA 2K6, NBA 2K7, NBA Showtime: NBA on NBC, NBA Hoopz, and NBA Inside Drive 2004. O'Neal appeared in the arcade version of NBA Jam (1993), NBA Jam (2003) and NBA Live 2004 as a current player and as a 1990s All-Star. O'Neal starred in Shaq Fu, a fighting game for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System and Sega Genesis. A sequel, Shaq Fu: A Legend Reborn, was released in 2018. O'Neal also appeared in Quest for the Code in 2002 as a voice actor, Backyard Basketball in 2004, Ready 2 Rumble Boxing: Round 2 as a playable boxer, and as an unlockable character in Delta Force: Black Hawk Down. O'Neal was also an unlockable character in UFC Undisputed 2010. O'Neal and his mother, Lucille Harrison, were featured in the documentary film Apple Pie, which aired on ESPN. O'Neal had a 2005 reality series on ESPN, Shaquille, and hosted a series called Shaq's Big Challenge on ABC. O'Neal appeared on NBA Ballers and NBA Ballers: Phenom, in the 2002 Discovery Channel special Motorcycle Mania 2 requesting an exceptionally large bike to fit his large size famed custom motorcycle builder Jesse James, in the first Idol Gives Back in 2007, on an episode of Fear Factor, and on an episode of MTV's Jackass, where he was lifted off the ground on Wee Man's back. O'Neal was a wrestling fan and made appearances at many WWE and AEW events. O'Neal was pranked on the MTV show Punk'd when a crew member accused him of stealing his parking space. After O'Neal and his wife went into a restaurant, Ashton Kutcher's crew members let the air out of O'Neal's tires. O'Neal and the crew member then got into an altercation and after Kutcher told O'Neal he had been Punk'd, O'Neal made an obscene gesture at the camera. O'Neal starred in a reality show called Shaq Vs. which premiered on August 18, 2009, on ABC. The show featured O'Neal competing against other athletes at their own sports. On July 14, 2011, O'Neal announced that he would join Turner Network Television (TNT) as an analyst on its NBA basketball games, joining Ernie Johnson, Kenny Smith, and Charles Barkley. He hosted the show Upload with Shaquille O'Neal which aired on TruTV for one season. In September 2015 whilst promoting sportswear giant Reebok in South Korea, O'Neal joined the cast in the South Korean variety television show Off to School where he went to Seo Incheon High School. The show features various celebrities attending a selected high school as students for three days. The producer of the show, Kim No-eun said, "We've worked hard on our guest list this season, so Chu Sung Hoon will be appearing on a cable channel for the first time. Shaquille O'Neal will be on the show as well. We succeeded in casting him after a lot of effort. O'Neal will be visiting Korea for a promotion and will be visiting the school on the last day. He will have lunch with the students. We're even preparing a big match between Chu Sung Hoon and Shaquille O'Neal. We're specially preparing a uniform for Shaquille O'Neal." In October 2022, O'Neal signed a long-term contract extension with Warner Bros. Discovery Sports to continue as a host on Inside the NBA. O'Neal has made numerous appearances in television commercials, including several Pepsi commercials, such as one from 1995 which parodied shows like I Love Lucy (the "Job Switching" episode), Bonanza, and Woody Woodpecker. Other companies and products for which he has appeared in commercials include Reebok, Nestlé Crunch, Gold Bond, Buick, The General, Papa John's, Hulu, Epson, Carnival Cruises, Frosted Flakes, American Express, Vitamin Water, and IcyHot, among others. O'Neal began training in mixed martial arts (MMA) in 2000. At Jonathan Burke's Gracie Gym, he trained in boxing, jiu-jitsu, Muay Thai and wrestling. At the gym, he used the nickname Diesel. O'Neal challenged kickboxer and mixed martial artist Choi Hong-man to a mixed martial arts rules bout in a YouTube video posted on June 17, 2009. Choi replied to an email asking him if he would like to fight O'Neal saying "Yes, if there is a chance." Choi also responded to a question asking if O'Neal had a chance of winning with a simple "No." On August 28, 2010, in an interview at UFC 118 in Boston, O'Neal reiterated his desire to fight Choi. A lifelong professional wrestling fan, O'Neal has made numerous appearances at televised events over the years for four different promotions. His favorite wrestlers are Tony Atlas, Junkyard Dog, André the Giant, and Brock Lesnar. In 1994, O'Neal made several appearances in World Championship Wrestling (WCW), including at the Bash at the Beach pay per view, where he presented the title belt to the winner of the WCW World Heavyweight Championship match between Hulk Hogan and Ric Flair. In July 2009, O'Neal served as the guest host for a live broadcast of WWE's Monday Night Raw. As part of the show, O'Neal got into a physical altercation with seven-foot-tall wrestler Big Show. In September 2012, O'Neal made a guest appearance on Total Nonstop Action Wrestling's Impact Wrestling program, where he had a backstage segment with Hulk Hogan. In April 2016, O'Neal participated in his first-ever match, when he was a surprise celebrity entry in the André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal at WrestleMania 32. O'Neal eliminated Damien Sandow, and had another confrontation with Big Show before being eliminated himself by most of the other wrestlers. In July at the 2016 ESPY Awards on the red carpet, Big Show and O'Neal had another brief confrontation. A match was proposed for WrestleMania 33, which O'Neal accepted. In January 2017, the two began calling each other out on social media, posting workout videos of themselves preparing for the potential match. After weeks of discussion, the match was cancelled. According to Dave Meltzer of Wrestling Observer Newsletter, the match was canceled due to monetary reasons, as both parties could not agree on a deal. Big Show later stated it was scheduling issues on O'Neal's part that caused the cancellation. On the November 11, 2020 episode of AEW Dynamite, Jade Cargill interrupted Cody Rhodes and teased the arrival of O'Neal in All Elite Wrestling (AEW). He made a cameo appearance on Being The Elite and it was later confirmed that O'Neal had been appearing backstage at recent AEW tapings, including Full Gear. He appeared on the December 9 episode of AEW Dynamite and addressed AEW in a sit-down interview with Tony Schiavone and Brandi Rhodes. At the end of the interview, O'Neal got water thrown on him by Brandi after telling her to get pointers from Cargill, who had broken Brandi's arm several weeks ago. On the March 3, 2021 episode of AEW Dynamite titled The Crossroads, O'Neal teamed with Jade Cargill to defeat Cody Rhodes and Red Velvet. During the match, O'Neal paid tribute to Brodie Lee with his signature gesture and powerbomb and was driven through two tables by Cody, who hit O'Neal with a flying crossbody tackle as O'Neal was standing on the ring apron, knocking O'Neal through the tables that were set up at ringside. As of 2022[update] O'Neal is among the five wealthiest NBA players, with a net worth of $400 million. He was an active bond investor in the early 1990s but continued to wade into stocks and made investments in various companies such as General Electric, Apple, and PepsiCo. He described what has worked best for him in stock investing was where he felt a personal connection with the company. O'Neal refused to endorse Wheaties cereal because he preferred Frosted Flakes. He has also been an active real estate entrepreneur. O'Neal was looking to expand his business ventures with real-estate development projects aimed at assisting Orlando home owners facing foreclosure. His plans involved buying the mortgages of those who had fallen into foreclosure and then selling the homes back to them under more affordable terms. He would make a small profit in return, but wanted to make an investment in Orlando and help out homeowners. In conjunction with Boraie Development, O'Neal has developed projects in his hometown of Newark, New Jersey, including, CityPlex12 and One Riverview. O'Neal is on the advisory board for Tout Industries, a social video service startup company based in San Francisco. He received the position in return for breaking news of his NBA retirement on the service. In September 2013, O'Neal became a minority owner of the Sacramento Kings. In April 2018, O'Neal was named the general manager of Kings Guard Gaming, the Kings' NBA 2K League affiliate. In January 2022, O'Neal sold his stake in the Kings. O'Neal was an early investor in Google. In June 2015, he invested in technology startup Loyale3 Holdings Inc., a San Francisco brokerage firm whose website and mobile app enables companies to sell a piece of their IPOs directly to small investors who put up as a little as $100 and also allows investors to regularly buy small amounts of shares in already public companies. O'Neal is an investor for esports team NRG Esports. He has also appeared in television commercials promoting the Counter-Strike: Global Offensive league ELeague. O'Neal favors franchising businesses because of their simplicity and proven success. In late 2016, he purchased the Krispy Kreme location at 295 Ponce de Leon Avenue in Atlanta. O'Neal is also the global spokesperson for the company. He has owned and sold 155 Five Guys restaurants—about 10% of all locations—and owns 17 Auntie Anne's restaurants. O'Neal also owns 150 car washes, 40 health clubs, a movie theater in Newark, and the Big Chicken brand of chicken sandwiches. In 2018, O'Neal created the combination music festival, circus and carnival, Shaq's Fun House, in partnership with Medium Rare, which is held annually. The event usually features celebrity DJs and performers. In early 2019, O'Neal joined the Papa John's board of directors and invested in nine stores in the Atlanta area. In addition, he became the spokesperson for the company as part of the three-year contract. The next year, Papa John's introduced the Shaq-a-Roni, a pizza dedicated to O'Neal. In 2021, O'Neal, among other high-profile athletes and celebrities, was a paid spokesperson for FTX, a cryptocurrency exchange. In November 2022, FTX filed for bankruptcy, wiping out billions of dollars in customer funds as well as O'Neal's personal stake in the company. He, alongside other spokespeople, is currently being sued for promoting unregistered securities through a class-action lawsuit. In February 2022, the U.S. 11th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in a lawsuit against Bitconnect that the Securities Act of 1933 extends to targeted solicitation using social media. In 2022, O'Neal premiered his halloween event in Long Beach called Shaqtoberfest. In October 2023, O'Neal was named Reebok's President of Basketball. In August 2010, O'Neal was sued by his personal IT technician, Shawn Darling, after O'Neal had allegedly attempted to plant child pornography on Darling's computer. Darling claimed that O'Neal had originally tried to protect himself by hacking his mistresses' voicemails and deleting relevant messages. Darling also alleged that O'Neal had used law enforcement contacts to obtain restricted information on those mistresses, and that O'Neal subsequently threw his laptop into a lake to destroy possible evidence. In 2017, a trial court ruled that Darling had not filed the lawsuit "in good faith", and that the accusations made by Darling occurred after he had attempted to extort $12,000,000 from O'Neal in return for thousands of stolen emails and electronic files. Throughout the trial, Darling failed to submit adequate evidence to back up his claims. In 2021, the litigation ended with a court ruling that O'Neal was entitled to $412,914.50 in legal fees. In April 2014, O'Neal posted a photo on Instagram that showed himself mocking Jahmel Binion who suffers from Ectodermal dysplasia. O'Neal issued a public apology, stating that he and Binion had spoken and that he's "made a friend today". Binion would however go on to sue O'Neal for a sum larger than $25,000. In 2016, Binion withdrew the lawsuit after coming to a settlement agreement with O'Neal. O'Neal was raised by a Baptist mother and a Muslim stepfather and said that they taught him both. Both Robin Wright in her book Rock the Casbah as well as the Los Angeles Times have identified O'Neal as a Muslim. However, O'Neal has said, "I'm Muslim, I'm Jewish, I'm Buddhist, I'm everybody 'cause I'm a people person." O'Neal married Shaunie Nelson on December 26, 2002. The couple have four children: Shareef (b. January 11, 2000), Amirah (b. November 13, 2001), Shaqir (b. April 19, 2003), and Me'arah (b. May 1, 2006). Nelson also has one son from a previous relationship, Myles. O'Neal has a daughter named Taahirah O'Neal (b. July 19, 1996) from a previous relationship with his ex-girlfriend Arnetta Yardbourgh. On September 4, 2007, O'Neal filed for divorce from Shaunie in a Miami-Dade Circuit court. Shaunie later said that the couple was back together and that the divorce was withdrawn. However, on November 10, 2009, Shaunie filed an intent to divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. The divorce was finalized in 2011. Shaq blames himself for the failed marriage and says he made mistakes and was "greedy." In 2015, Shareef was seen in high school basketball highlights as a 6-foot-7-inch (2.01 m) freshman power forward, and had been described as having a "polar opposite playing style to his father" due to his more athletic build and better shooting range. Shareef played in college for the UCLA Bruins before transferring to LSU. In summer 2010, O'Neal began dating reality TV star Nicole "Hoopz" Alexander. The couple resided at O'Neal's home in Sudbury, Massachusetts, and later split in August 2012. O'Neal began dating Laticia Rolle, a model, originally from Gardner, Massachusetts, in early 2014. They later split in March 2018. In June 2005 when Hall of Fame center George Mikan died, O'Neal, who considered Mikan to be a major influence, extended an offer to his family to pay all of the funeral expenses, which they accepted. O'Neal is a member of Omega Psi Phi fraternity. O'Neal is a 2009 inductee of the New Jersey Hall of Fame. O'Neal became a Freemason in 2011, becoming a member of Widow's Son Lodge No. 28 in Boston. O'Neal is a Prince Hall Freemason. On January 31, 2012, O'Neal was honored as one of the 35 Greatest McDonald's All-Americans. O'Neal's stepfather, Philip Arthur Harrison, died of a heart attack on September 10, 2013. O'Neal is a fan of the National Hockey League's New Jersey Devils, who play in his hometown of Newark, and has been seen at several games over the years. On January 11, 2014, O'Neal performed the ceremonial first puck and drove a Zamboni for a game between the Devils and the Florida Panthers. O'Neal is also a fan of English football club Northampton Town, and has posted videos of support to their official YouTube page. O'Neal is a fan of National Football League's Dallas Cowboys. According to him, football was actually his first sport and he wants to be like his idol, Ed "Too Tall" Jones. In 2016, O'Neal purchased a 14.3-acre, two-house compound in McDonough, Georgia for $1.15 million. It is around 30 miles southeast of Atlanta. O'Neal endorsed Republican New Jersey governor Chris Christie in his 2013 reelection bid, appearing in a television advertisement. He participated in a virtual rally for then-presidential candidate Joe Biden and voted for the first time during the 2020 presidential election. O'Neal turned down a $40 million deal with Reebok after hearing a mother complain about how expensive his shoes were. In July 2023, O'Neal purchased his first private jet; a $27 million Bombardier Challenger 650, complete with the iconic "Dunkman" logo on the tail. NBA 4× NBA champion (2000–2002, 2006) Three-time NBA Finals MVP 2000 NBA MVP 15-time NBA All-Star Three-time NBA All-Star Game MVP Eight-time All-NBA First Team Two-time All-NBA Second Team Four-time All-NBA Third Team Three-time NBA All-Defensive Second Team 1993 NBA Rookie of the Year 1993 NBA All-Rookie First Team Two-time NBA scoring champion NBA 50th Anniversary Team NBA 75th Anniversary Team Number 34 retired by the Los Angeles Lakers Number 32 retired by the Miami Heat Number 32 retired by the Orlando Magic USA Basketball 1996 Olympic Gold Medal 1994 FIBA Basketball World Cup 1994 FIBA World Cup MVP 1994 USA Basketball Male Athlete of the Year NCAA 1991 Adolph Rupp Trophy winner Two-time Consensus All-American Number 33 retired by the LSU Tigers Media 1991 Associated Press Player of the Year 1991 UPI Player of the Year 2005 BET Sportsman of the Year Sports Emmy Awards 2012 – Outstanding Promotional Announcement Academy Awards 2022 – Short Subject Documentary (as an executive producer of The Queen of Basketball) Halls of Fame Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame (2016) National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame (2014) FIBA Hall of Fame (2017) Shaq Diesel (1993) Shaq Fu: Da Return (1994) You Can't Stop the Reign (1996) Respect (1998) Gorilla Warfare (2023) Shaquille O'Neal Presents His Superfriends, Vol. 1 (2001) Shaq Attaq! (1994) A Good Reason to Look Up (1998) Shaq and the Beanstalk and Other Very Tall Tales (1999) Shaq Talks Back (2002) Shaq Uncut: My Story (2011) Little Shaq (2015) Little Shaq Takes a Chance (2016) Little Shaq: Star of the Week (2016) Shaq's Family Style (2022) List of National Basketball Association career scoring leaders List of National Basketball Association career rebounding leaders List of National Basketball Association career blocks leaders List of National Basketball Association career turnovers leaders List of National Basketball Association career free throw scoring leaders List of National Basketball Association career minutes played leaders List of National Basketball Association career playoff scoring leaders List of National Basketball Association career playoff rebounding leaders List of National Basketball Association career playoff blocks leaders List of National Basketball Association career playoff turnovers leaders List of National Basketball Association career playoff free throw scoring leaders List of individual National Basketball Association scoring leaders by season List of National Basketball Association players with most points in a game List of National Basketball Association single-game blocks leaders List of National Basketball Association seasons played leaders List of National Basketball Association top rookie scoring averages Highest-paid NBA players by season Shaq–Kobe feud List of NCAA Division I men's basketball career blocks leaders List of NCAA Division I men's basketball season blocks leaders List of NCAA Division I men's basketball season rebounding leaders List of NCAA Division I basketball career triple-doubles leaders List of Freemasons "Shaquille O'Neal | Stats". NBA.com. March 6, 1972. Archived from the original on February 12, 2022. Retrieved February 13, 2022. "CBS Sports' 50 greatest NBA players of all time: Where do LeBron, Curry rank?". CBS Sports. February 17, 2017. Archived from the original on December 6, 2018. Retrieved December 18, 2017. "All-Time #NBArank: Shaq comes in at No. 9". ESPN. February 9, 2016. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved December 18, 2017. "SLAM 500 Greatest NBA Players of All Time | Basketball-Reference.com". Basketball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on May 14, 2019. Retrieved December 18, 2017. Bailey, Andy (September 25, 2019). "NBA All-Time Player Rankings: Top 10 Centers". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Heisler, Mark. "Shaquille O'Neal traded to Cleveland Cavaliers for 3 players, cash". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 28, 2009. Retrieved May 23, 2010. Zillgitt, Jeff (August 5, 2010). "Void filled: 15-time All-Star Shaquille O'Neal to Celtics". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011. Retrieved March 15, 2011. "NBA at 50: Top 50 Players". NBA.com. Archived from the original on November 14, 2017. Retrieved January 9, 2022. "Shaquille O'Neal NBA & ABA Statistics". Basketball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 1, 2021. Retrieved August 1, 2011. "Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame Class of 2016 Announcement presented by Haggar Clothing Company". Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. April 4, 2016. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2016. "Dream Team, Shaq and Kukoc headline 2017 Class of FIBA Hall of Fame Inductees". FIBA.basketball. August 23, 2017. Archived from the original on March 12, 2018. Retrieved August 3, 2021. "NBA's 75 Anniversary Team Players". NBA.com. December 25, 2021. Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved February 13, 2022. Greenburg, Zack (July 31, 2018). "How Shaq Became The Biggest DJ On The Planet". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 22, 2019. Retrieved July 31, 2021. "Homepage". The Big Podcast with Shaq. Archived from the original on July 17, 2017. Retrieved July 14, 2017 – via podcastone.com. "Kings Guard Gaming Names Shaquille O'Neal First General Manager". ThePostGame. April 2, 2018. Archived from the original on June 10, 2019. Retrieved April 4, 2018. "Shaquille O'Neal | Biography & Facts". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on April 29, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Wise, Mike. "Shaq to biological father: 'I don't hate you'". Andscape. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved July 16, 2022. Plaschke, Bill (June 12, 2002). "'Biological Didn't Bother'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 25, 2010. Retrieved January 21, 2011. Wise, Mike (September 9, 2016). "Shaq to biological father: 'I don't hate you'". Andscape. ESPN. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2016. Ryan, Michael (February 13, 2000). "Where They Gave Me A Chance". Parade. Archived from the original on June 28, 2006. Retrieved March 21, 2006. "Shaq Sets Bar High for Young Lives, BIG Stories Campaign". Army.mil. United States Army. April 2014. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved February 23, 2016. "Key Moments In Shaquille O'neal History". South Florida Sun-Sentinel. July 11, 2004. Archived from the original on June 14, 2012. Retrieved January 2, 2011. McMurray, Bill. Bill McMurray's Texas High School All-Time Sports Record Book (6th ed.). Four Star Publications. Schmitz, Brian (August 25, 1992). "Shaquille Shows Class In Switching To No. 32". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on September 8, 2017. Retrieved July 14, 2017. "O'Neal to get degree from LSU". The Daily Texan. December 12, 2000. Archived from the original on June 3, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2007. "O'Neal: LSU Hall of Fame". barrystickets.com. 2007. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2007. Athletic Department. "LSU Basketball Practice Facility – LSUsports.net – The Official Web Site of LSU Tigers Athletics". LSUsports.net. Archived from the original on February 10, 2016. Retrieved February 23, 2016. Luke, Chelsea. (April 28, 2015). "College triple-double header: Kyle Collinsworth versus Shaquille O'Neal" Archived May 29, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 17, 2015. "Michael Carter-Williams Named Eastern Conference Player of the Week". NBA.com. Archived from the original on March 20, 2014. Retrieved August 8, 2014. "MAGIC: Magic History". NBA.com/magic. Archived from the original on February 1, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. McCallum, Jack (March 3, 1997). "The Young And The Feckless". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved November 9, 2010. On more than one occasion during O'Neal's rookie season of 1992–93, I heard him say of his then coach, "We've got to get Matty [Guokas] out of here and bring in Brian." "Hill Is Named Coach of Magic". The New York Times. July 1, 1993. Archived from the original on June 10, 2019. Retrieved November 6, 2010. Matt Guokas, who coached the Orlando Magic to the National Basketball Association's most improved record last season, was replaced today by an assistant, Brian Hill, and was reassigned to the front office as Orlando's vice president of basketball development. "Shaquille O'Neal 1993–94 Game Log". Basketball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on July 29, 2012. Retrieved August 5, 2010. Daubs, Kyle (March 6, 2022). "Shaquille O'Neal's Stats For Each Season: The Most Dominant Player In NBA History". Fadeaway World. Archived from the original on October 3, 2023. Retrieved September 9, 2023. Gupta, Siddhant (April 25, 2023). ""How long do I got to go down to find Shaq" - Charles Barkley clowns Shaquille O'Neal for his highest ever scoring game in the playoffs". www.sportskeeda.com. Archived from the original on October 3, 2023. Retrieved September 9, 2023. "O'Neal and Hill get the jump, but Robinson, Kidd grab the votes". Baltimore Sun. April 18, 1995. Archived from the original on October 3, 2023. Retrieved September 9, 2023. "1994–95 Season – THE OFFICIAL SITE OF THE ORLANDO MAGIC". nba.com. Archived from the original on December 1, 2010. Retrieved October 31, 2015. MacMullan, Jackie (July 1, 1996). "Poof! Shaquille O'Neal is among a host of NBA free agents who could vanish from their teams". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on May 17, 2010. Retrieved November 9, 2010. It asked whether the Magic should fire coach Brian Hill if that were one of O'Neal's conditions for returning. An overwhelming 82% answered no. Wojnarowski, Adrian (June 2, 2009). "Shaq's legacy binds Magic, Lakers". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on December 10, 2011. Retrieved November 9, 2010. The poll appeared as Shaq and the Olympic basketball team trained in town. Reilly, Rick (April 21, 1997). "Shaq's world". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved November 9, 2010. He hated the power struggle with his coach, Brian Hill. Blinebury, Fran (July 1, 2010). "Magic are proof that wounds from star's departure do heal". NBA.com. Archived from the original on August 9, 2010. Retrieved November 9, 2010. There were occasional gripes at coach Brian Hill. O'Neal, Shaquille (2002). Shaq Talks Back. St. Martin's Paperbacks. p. 52. ISBN 978-0-312-98259-1. Retrieved November 7, 2010. We just didn't respect him. Sometimes he went from nice to hardcore and people were looking around, like, 'This ain't the guy we know.' O'Neal, Shaquille (2002). Shaq Talks Back. St. Martin's Paperbacks. p. 151. ISBN 978-0-312-98259-1. Retrieved November 14, 2010. When I was in Orlando, I really felt like a big fish in a small, dried-up pond. No matter what I did, it got talked about, until I couldn't really live my life. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, pp. 104–5, 108, 110. "NBA – Lakers Sign O'Neal Raise Ticket Prices". The Seattle Times. Associated Press. July 18, 1996. Archived from the original on August 27, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2009. "Shaq signs multi-million contract with LA Lakers". Manila Standard. July 20, 1996. Archived from the original on February 21, 2022. Retrieved December 29, 2010. Araton, Harvey (July 19, 1996). "Sports of The Times;Shaq Is Now California Dreamin'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 2, 2010. Retrieved November 15, 2010. So is greed, Michael Douglas once argued as Gordon Gekko, though O'Neal's changing coasts and uniforms is not about money. We repeat: not about money. Elliot, Stuart (November 4, 1993). "Sports Products Deal For Shaquille O'Neal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 30, 2010. Retrieved November 15, 2010. The athlete's other product agreements include Pepsi-Cola and Reebok. "1996-97 Los Angeles Lakers Roster and Stats". Basketball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. "1997 Playoff Results". NBA.com. Archived from the original on April 20, 2010. Retrieved December 29, 2010. Stein, Marc (December 19, 1996). "O'Neal wanted to pack more offensive punch". Los Angeles Daily News. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved April 26, 2011 – via thefreelibrary.com. "1998 Playoff Results". NBA.com. Archived from the original on May 23, 2010. Retrieved June 17, 2015. Kreigel, Mark (May 18, 2011). "Jackson shares thoughts on final season". FoxSports.com. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. "Shaq, Barkley scuffle, are ejected". Associated Press. November 11, 1999. Archived from the original on February 2, 2012. Retrieved January 8, 2012. "Los Angeles Lakers at Los Angeles Clippers Box Score, March 6, 2000". Basketball-Reference. Archived from the original on January 27, 2020. Retrieved January 27, 2020. "NBA Players with 60% 2b Points in a Game With%3d0 3pm". Archived from the original on November 25, 2021. Retrieved November 25, 2021. Heisler, Mark (May 11, 2011). "Phil Jackson's tenure produced the most success and fun we've ever seen". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 17, 2011. Retrieved June 17, 2015. "Lakers hold off Sixers, 96–91". Amarillo Globe-News. Associated Press. June 11, 2001. Archived from the original on June 22, 2011. Retrieved November 9, 2010. The 76ers trailed from the second quarter on and missed their one and only chance to tie the game when Allen Iverson could make only one of two free throws with 2:06 left – 15 seconds after O'Neal drew his sixth foul for backing over Dikembe Mutombo. Brown, Tim (August 14, 2002). "O'Neal Surgery Is Likely". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 9, 2013. Retrieved November 17, 2010. A month before last training camp he had surgery to correct a claw toe deformity in the smallest toe of his left foot. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p. 153. "Shaq to be sacked". Sports Illustrated. January 13, 2002. Archived from the original on March 12, 2011. Retrieved October 11, 2008. Berkow, Ira (January 16, 2002). "Sports of The Times; N.B.A. Needs To Hit Shaq Much Harder". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 30, 2023. Retrieved February 18, 2017. McCallum, Jack (June 3, 2002). "Trading blows and barbs, big men Vlade Divac and Shaquille O'Neal have turned the Western finals into comic opera". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on October 20, 2010. Retrieved November 9, 2010. There was some head-scratching before it was divined that O'Neal meant "cheat" and not something either X-rated or far out, like "covenant" or "coronet." "消費者金融を低金利で利用するには". Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015.. Retrieved June 17, 2015. "Shaquille O'Neal Bio Page". NBA.com. Archived from the original on February 26, 2011. Retrieved June 1, 2011. sat out the first 12 games of the season (Oct. 29-Nov. 22) on the Injured List recovering from off-season foot surgery O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p. 155. Ventre, Mark (December 12, 2005). "It looks like Shaq's reshuffling Heat house". NBCSports.com. Archived from the original on October 10, 2012. Retrieved October 13, 2010. Remember, this is the same Shaquille O'Neal who, while with the Lakers, once waited all summer to have his injured toe operated on, then did so just before training camp and explained, "I got hurt on company time, so I'll heal on company time." "2002–03 Los Angeles Lakers Schedule and Results". basketball-reference.com. Archived from the original on September 10, 2010. Retrieved October 13, 2010. Lazenby, Roland (2006). The Show: The Inside Story of the Spectacular Los Angeles Lakers in the Words of Those Who Lived It. New York City: McGraw-Hill Professional. p. 421. ISBN 978-0-07-143034-0. Retrieved April 18, 2011. the show roland lazenby. Bryant, Kobe (October 28, 2003). "Kobe critical of Shaq's leadership". ESPN. Interviewed by Jim Gray. Archived from the original on November 4, 2011. Retrieved December 9, 2011. Lazenby 2006, p. 428. "Shaq happy, Lakers in shock after trade". MSNBC. NBC. July 15, 2004. Archived from the original on July 3, 2012. Retrieved December 9, 2011. Lazenby 2006, p. 434. "2004–05 NBA Awards Voting". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved June 1, 2011. Robbins, Liz (December 27, 2005). "BASKETBALL; Riley, Advocating for O'Neal, Objects to the 'Sumo' Defense". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved November 17, 2010. The criticism O'Neal and others had for Van Gundy after the Heat's loss to Detroit in Game 7 of the Eastern Conference finals last season was that he did not call enough plays for O'Neal. "Shaq, Heat agree to five-year, $100M contract". ESPN.com. August 2, 2005. Archived from the original on December 28, 2022. Retrieved December 28, 2022. "Shaq: Magic's Van Gundy is 'a master of panic'". ESPN.com. March 4, 2009. Archived from the original on December 28, 2022. Retrieved December 28, 2022. Shaq Quotes Archived January 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 17, 2015. "Kobe or Shaq: Who Has Been More Important To Their Teams Over the Years?" Archived February 25, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. Bleacher Report. Retrieved June 17, 2015. Kraczkowski, Kevin. "Miami Heat Player Countdown: 15. Shaquille O'Neal" Archived September 8, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. (October 7, 2013). Retrieved June 17, 2015. "Heat Playoff History 2006" Archived May 10, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 17, 2015. "Knicks take advantage of Shaq-less heat with blowout". ESPN. Associated Press. November 17, 2006. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2010. Starting with Shaquille O'Neal's left knee, the Miami Heat are hurting. "Shaq, Wade return in Heat's OT loss to Pacers". ESPN. Associated Press. January 24, 2007. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2010. O'Neal, who came off the bench after missing 35 games while recovering from knee surgery, finished with five points and five rebounds in 14 minutes. "Shaq rips Jackson as 'Benedict Arnold'". NBC Sports. December 26, 2006. Archived from the original on March 15, 2011. Retrieved November 12, 2010. "How can Benedict Arnold be reliable in what he says?" O'Neal said Monday after the Miami Heat's 101–85 victory over the Lakers, the Los Angeles Times reported. "Miami Heat – Sports Ecyclopedia". www.sportsecyclopedia.com. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved June 17, 2015. Thorpe, David. (March 3, 2007). "Scouting breakdown: Can Shaq carry the Heat?" Archived June 17, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 17, 2015. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p. 206. O'Neal, Shaquille; MacMullan, Jackie (2011). Shaq Uncut: My Story. Grand Central Publishing. pp. 210–11. ISBN 978-1-4555-0441-1 – via Internet Archive. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p. 212. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, pp. 215–16. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p. 216. Ludden, Johnny (February 6, 2008). "Suns, Heat agree to Shaq trade". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved November 13, 2010. In a move that could signify a dramatic change to their go-go-go, let-it-fly style of play, the Phoenix Suns acquired former All-Star center Shaquille O'Neal from the Miami Heat on Wednesday for Shawn Marion and Marcus Banks. "Daily Dime: Shaq gets the spotlight, while Kobe gets the game". ESPN .com. February 21, 2008. Archived from the original on December 9, 2013. Retrieved February 21, 2008. Shaquille O'Neal career stats and splits Archived August 13, 2006, at the Wayback Machine NBA.com Austin Burton. "Why Shaq? Here's Why". dimemag.com. Archived from the original on July 20, 2008. "Riley bothered by Shaq's criticism of Heat players, staff". ESPN. March 27, 2008. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011. Retrieved November 13, 2010. We have professionals who know what to do. No one is asking me to play with Chris Quinn or Ricky Davis. I'm actually on a team again. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011 p. 221. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011 p. 213. "Player profile – Shaquille O'Neal". yahoo.com. Archived from the original on April 8, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2017. "Magic's Van Gundy calls out Shaq for flopping". ESPN. Associated Press. March 3, 2009. Archived from the original on June 13, 2011. Retrieved October 15, 2010. I was shocked, seriously, shocked", Magic coach Stan Van Gundy said of O'Neal's flopping. "And very disappointed cause he knows what it's like. Let's stand up and play like men, and I think our guy did that tonight. Sheridan, Chris (March 5, 2009). "Shaq rips Van Gundy for flop comment". ESPN. Archived from the original on November 11, 2011. Retrieved November 9, 2010. "Flopping is playing like that your whole career. I was trying to take the charge, trying to get a call. It probably was a flop, but flopping is the wrong use of words. Flopping would describe his coaching", O'Neal said, steering the conversation back to Van Gundy. Madsen, Mark (March 7, 2009). "What is a flop?". MarkMadsen.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2011. Retrieved November 9, 2010. So, this whole commotion about whether or not Shaq's play against Dwight Howard was a flop is so funny because everyone in the league tries to flop on Shaq and Shaq never flops back. Gregory, Sean (October 30, 2006). "10 Questions for Shaquille O'Neal". Time. Archived from the original on November 30, 2010. Retrieved November 9, 2010. Make a guy have to beat a guy—not flop and get calls and be nice to the referees and kiss ass. Friedman, Jason (March 6, 2009). "Clash Of The Titans". Rockets.com. Archived from the original on November 17, 2010. Retrieved November 9, 2010. "It's not going to be man-on-man, so don't even try that," says O'Neal with an incredulous laugh. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p. 213. "Cavaliers Acquire 15-Time NBA All-Star and Four-Time NBA Champion Shaquille ONeal". NBA.com. June 25, 2009. Archived from the original on November 9, 2012. Retrieved June 25, 2009. Finnan, Bob (July 3, 2009). "'WIN A RING FOR THE KING': Shaq makes his Cleveland debut". Morning Journal. Archived from the original on October 30, 2023. Retrieved July 27, 2021. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, pp. 234–37. "Cleveland Cavaliers' Shaquille O'Neal leaves game with 'significant thumb injury Archived March 1, 2010, at the Wayback Machine". Associated Press. February 25, 2010. Retrieved March 1, 2010. "The Game Happens Here". NBA.com. Archived from the original on December 3, 2010. Retrieved August 5, 2010. Siddiqi, DJ (September 6, 2016). "Shaquille O'Neal: Cavaliers should have won title in 2010". 247sports.com. Archived from the original on October 30, 2023. Retrieved January 2, 2018. Washburn, Gary (September 19, 2010). "Grousbeck's faith goes right down to the core". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on September 22, 2010. Retrieved October 14, 2010. "The minute I heard Kobe [Bryant] say he had one more ring than Shaq, I said to Danny, 'Let's go get Shaq,' and it happened", said Grousbeck. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, pp. 243–44. Boston Celtics (August 4, 2010). "Celtics Sign Shaquille O'Neal". NBA.com/Celtics. Archived from the original on August 14, 2010. Retrieved August 4, 2010. Washburn, Gary (August 5, 2010). "Shaq aboard for two years". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on October 6, 2010. Retrieved November 9, 2010. All Ainge had to offer was the veteran minimum of $1.35 million, and O'Neal compromised by accepting that on a two-year deal. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p. 241. Beck, Howard (July 23, 2010). "Multiple Nicknames; Dwindling Openings". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 17, 2010. Retrieved November 17, 2010. The Dallas Mavericks had interest, but balked at O'Neal's salary demands. Cunningham, Michael (August 5, 2010). "Atlanta Hawks: No Shaq . . . now what?". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on December 9, 2010. Retrieved November 17, 2010. Atlanta also wasn't willing to pay Shaq more than the minimum and that was a sticking point for him. Shaughnessy, Dan (August 11, 2010). "A large addition to Celtics' sizeable history". www.boston.com. Archived from the original on August 14, 2010. Retrieved August 10, 2010. MacMullan, Jackie (September 27, 2010). "Shaq ready to leave mark in Boston". ESPN. Archived from the original on October 1, 2010. Retrieved October 14, 2010. But I don't compete with little guards. I don't compete with little guys who run around dominating the ball, throwing up 30 shots a night – like D-Wade, Kobe. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p. 244. May, Peter (April 11, 2011). "Celtics Creak Toward Postseason, Hoping They Have Legs for a Run". The New York Times. p. D7. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Forsberg, Chris (November 11, 2010). "Shaquille O'Neal starts vs. Heat". ESPNBoston.com. Archived from the original on November 14, 2010. Retrieved March 22, 2011. Forsberg, Chris (December 19, 2010). "Celtics get Shaquille O'Neal back". ESPNBoston.com. Archived from the original on December 22, 2010. Retrieved March 22, 2011. Forsberg, Chris (January 22, 2011). "Shaquille O'Neal injures hip". ESPNBoston.com. Archived from the original on January 25, 2011. Retrieved March 22, 2011. Payne, Greg (March 7, 2011). "Shaq says he's 85 percent; out another week". ESPNBoston.com. Archived from the original on March 11, 2011. Retrieved March 22, 2011. Payne, Greg (May 16, 2011). "Doc Rivers: Timing of trade was off". ESPNBoston.com. Archived from the original on May 19, 2011. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011 p. 256. "Amare Stoudemire back as Celts' reserves top Knicks' second string". ESPN. Associated Press. April 13, 2011. Archived from the original on April 17, 2011. Retrieved April 14, 2011. Shaquille O'Neal, who has played 5 minutes, 29 seconds since Feb. 1, also sat out. Forsberg, Chris (May 18, 2011). "Report card: Shaquille O'Neal". ESPNBoston.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2011. O'Neal, MacMullan p. 257. MacMullen, Jackie (June 1, 2011). "Shaquille O'Neal announces retirement". ESPN. Archived from the original on June 2, 2011. Retrieved June 1, 2011. Olivarez-Giles, Nathan (June 1, 2011). "Shaq announces NBA retirement on Twitter, using Tout iPhone app [Updated]". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 3, 2011. Reynolds, Tim (June 3, 2011). "Shaq moving on to the next chapter—retirement". Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved June 3, 2011.[permanent dead link] ESPN [1] Archived August 20, 2011, at the Wayback Machine O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p. 112. Jackie MacMullan The NBA Archived November 4, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, Sports Illustrated, March 29, 1999. SCOTT HOWARD-COOPER and TIM KAWAKAMI O'Neal, Bryant Still Possible for Olympics Archived March 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Los Angeles Times, June 13, 2000. Chris Sheridan Weight of the world leans on U.S. team Archived March 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, The Seattle Times, September 2, 2002. Marc Stein Team USA carousel continues Archived January 6, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, ESPN, May 29, 2004. AP Colangelo says Shaq not ruling out Olympics Archived November 6, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, ESPN, January 7, 2006. Michael Cunningham Full Summer Gives U.s. Players More Than A Workout Archived July 1, 2012, at archive.today, South Florida Sun-Sentinel, July 21, 2006. "SUNS: Shaq on Board". NBA.com. Archived from the original on March 7, 2009. Retrieved December 29, 2010. Roberts, Selena (September 13, 1993). "New This Year In Nba: Shaq-proof Backboards". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Retrieved April 25, 2017. "Career Leaders and Records for Field Goal Pct". Basketball-reference.com. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved December 29, 2010. "Phoenix Suns vs. San Antonio Spurs – Recap – April 29, 2008". ESPN. April 29, 2008. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved December 9, 2011. Through the 2004–2005 season. "Regular Season Records: Free Throws". NBA.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2008. Retrieved December 29, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p. 139. "Career Leaders and Records for Free Throw Attempts –". Basketball-reference.com. Archived from the original on March 7, 2011. Retrieved December 29, 2010. Bob Baum (December 25, 2008). "Mason's 3-pointer gives Spurs 91–90 win over Suns". nba.com. Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 5, 2009. Retrieved May 29, 2009. Benjamin, Josh. (September 21, 2012). "5 Things Dwight Howard Does Better Than Shaquille O'Neal Ever Did With The LA Lakers" Archived October 30, 2023, at the Wayback Machine. Bleacher Report. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Medina, Mark (June 1, 2011). "Shaquille O'Neal's retirement brings reflections on his legacy with the Lakers". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 3, 2012. "NBA 75: At No. 8, Shaquille O'Neal was a dominant physical force who had an outsized personality to match". Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2023. Eric Pincus (April 2, 2013). "Lakers retire Shaquille O'Neal's jersey". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 3, 2013. Retrieved April 2, 2013. "Shaq and 31 more athletes with numbers retired by multiple teams". FOX Sports. Archived from the original on December 23, 2016. Retrieved December 22, 2016. "Shaq Now Among Small Group Of Athletes Whose Numbers Have Been Retired By Multiple Teams". Shaq. Archived from the original on February 26, 2016. Retrieved February 26, 2016. "Orlando Magic to retire Shaquille O'Neal's No. 32 jersey". NBA.com. January 4, 2024. Archived from the original on January 5, 2024. Retrieved January 5, 2024. "Shaquille O'Neal's No. 32 jersey first to be retired by Magic". ESPN. February 13, 2024. Retrieved February 14, 2024. Mike Bresnahan & Robyn Norwood (June 12, 2007). "Bank shot could pay off for Shaq". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 12, 2008. Retrieved December 7, 2019. Jack McCallum (December 10, 2002). "Inside the NBA – SI's Jack McCallum: Sizing up Shaq". CNNSI.com. Archived from the original on March 22, 2007. Retrieved March 2, 2007. Geof Harris (December 18, 2010). "Shaq Diesel: Never Say Never Again". the low post news. Archived from the original on December 17, 2013. Heisler, Mark (June 1, 2011). "Shaquille O'Neal was not always the most dominating, but always the most fun". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 6, 2011. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p.205 Dave McNary (June 23, 2000). "Admen strike back against SAG/AFTRA". Variety. Archived from the original on January 30, 2010. Retrieved December 7, 2019. "Sports stars break Hollywood strike". BBC News. June 22, 2000. Archived from the original on May 2, 2008. Retrieved November 11, 2007. Tim Povtak (November 5, 2002). "Kings Come Out Fighting". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on June 6, 2012. Retrieved December 9, 2011. Marc Narducci (April 19, 2003). "Kings Eyeing Crown, not L.A." The Philadelphia Inquirer. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 9, 2011. "Shaq was more than a dominant player". Sacramento Bee. June 1, 2011. Archived from the original on June 7, 2012. Retrieved December 9, 2011. Mark Medina (June 2, 2011). "Top 5 Shaq moments as a Laker". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 26, 2011. Retrieved December 9, 2011. Guillermo, Emil (January 14, 2003). "Shaq's Apology Not Good Enough". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 30, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2010. Perhaps we should put it in terms Shaq might understand: If a white comedian imitated Shaq by making monkey sounds while eating fried chicken and watermelon, would the point be clearer? Vecsey, George (January 12, 2003). "Sports of The Times; Fans in Shanghai Are Voting in the Mainstream". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 26, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2010. Yao quickly said: "The world is getting smaller, and I think it's important to have a greater understanding of other cultures. I believe Shaquille O'Neal was joking, but I think that a lot of Asian people don't understand that kind of joke." Brown, Tim (January 10, 2003). "Tall tale? Shaq says Yao comments were said in jest". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on March 30, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2010. "Chinese is hard to learn. I had trouble with it when I was little", Yao joked. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Wilborn, Michael (December 20, 2010). "Can't overestimate Yao Ming's impact". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 13, 2015. Shaquille O'Neal once told me he hated that he hazed Yao a little bit early in his career. "Shaq: 'I've been playing like Erick Dampier'". ESPN. May 13, 2005. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved December 9, 2011. "NBA.com: Finals 2006". ESPN. 2006. Archived from the original on February 22, 2012. Retrieved December 9, 2011. An A-to-Z remembrance of Shaq's career—basketball and (mostly) otherwise – Sports Illustrated, CNN "Miami vs. Los Angeles – Recap". ESPN. Associated Press. January 16, 2006. Archived from the original on June 14, 2006. Retrieved May 13, 2006. "Shaq Attacks Kobe: You Ruined My Marriage". TMZ. June 23, 2008. Archived from the original on December 7, 2011. Retrieved December 9, 2011. "Shaq takes a freestyle swipe at Kobe". ESPN.com. Associated Press. June 23, 2008. Archived from the original on June 30, 2008. Retrieved June 25, 2008. Reid, Shaheem (June 24, 2008). "Snoop Dogg, Nas, Cory Gunz See Nothing Wrong With Shaquille O'Neal's Anti-Kobe Freestyle". "MTV.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2008. Retrieved June 25, 2008. "Shaq booted from sheriff's 'posse' for Kobe rap". San Francisco Chronicle. Associated Press. June 24, 2008.[dead link] "Shaq Diesel". allmusicguide.com. Archived from the original on October 30, 2023. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "You Can't Stop the Reign". ew.com. December 13, 1996. Archived from the original on December 21, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2019. "Shaquille O'Neal Presents His Superfriends, Vol. 1" review allmusicguide.com Shaquille O'Neal at AllMusic. Retrieved June 17, 2011. Adi Joseph (March 6, 2013). "Shaq finally gets revenge on Aaron Carter". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 24, 2013. Retrieved March 26, 2013. Frisch, Ian (October 14, 2015). "Shaq's Next Act: Behind the Turntables". Vice. Archived from the original on November 20, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2019. Garcia, Brayden (June 21, 2023). "Shaquille O'Neal, aka 'DJ Diesel,' to Bring Dubstep Music Festival to Fort Worth This Fall." Archived June 23, 2023, at the Wayback Machine Yahoo! News. Retrieved 25 June 2023. Cihak, Lennon (October 20, 2021). "Shaquille O'Neal Joins Impressive Lineup at the 2021 Formula 1 U.S. Grand Prix". edm.com. The Arena Group. Archived from the original on October 24, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2021. Sani, Niko (October 7, 2021). "Here are the EDC Las Vegas 2021 Stage-by-Stage Lineups". edm.com. The Arena Group. Archived from the original on October 24, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2021. @djdiesel (October 23, 2021). "DJ DIESEL (@djdiesel) * Instagram photos and videos". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2021. Tonight I play my first EDC. I've been waiting for this moment for a long time. Let's turn the pit into a warzone. EDC LAS VEGAS I will see you at the bass pod tonight at 9:30PM! Sunkel, Cameron (June 7, 2023). "DJ Diesel Announces Debut Album, Unleashes No-Holds-Barred Single With Hairitage, "Bang Your Head"". EDM.com - The Latest Electronic Dance Music News, Reviews & Artists. Archived from the original on June 7, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2023. "Shaquille O'Neal, aka DIESEL, releases debut album: Listen". DJMag.com. August 18, 2023. Archived from the original on August 19, 2023. Retrieved August 19, 2023. Hogan, Nakia (December 16, 2000). "NBA star is now Shaq Graddy". Sports. The Times. Shreveport, Louisiana. p. 1C. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Shaquille O'Neal Graduates From College Archived October 6, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. ABC News. December 15, 2000. "The Big Executive? Shaq masters MBA". MSNBC. Associated Press. June 26, 2005. Archived from the original on June 27, 2005. The New York Times (2010). Questions For Shaquille O'Neal – Hoop Dreams – Interview Archived June 11, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved August 13, 2010. Barry University (2010). Educational Doctorate (Ed.D.) in Human Resource Development, Barry University Archived January 26, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved August 13, 2010. Gus Garcia-Roberts (April 19, 2012). "Shaquille O'Neal, Barry University Student, Is Not Actually Doing a Dissertation". Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. Retrieved May 4, 2012. "Shaquille O'Neal and ADSOE Faculty". Archived from the original on May 10, 2012. Retrieved May 4, 2012. page 3 of Shira Springer (August 29, 2010). "BIG man on campus". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on August 30, 2010. Retrieved August 30, 2010. Lateef Mungin (May 5, 2012). "Shaquille O'Neal to receive doctorate degree". CNN. Archived from the original on May 7, 2012. Retrieved May 7, 2012. Knaub, Kelly (May 6, 2012). "Shaquille O'Neal earns Doctorate". ABC Radio News website. Archived from the original on August 7, 2012. Retrieved May 6, 2012. Thamel, Pete (May 20, 2009). "O'Neal Hopes to Be Next Big Thing in Broadcasting". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 18, 2021. Retrieved March 21, 2021. Long, Lauren (May 19, 2009). "Shaq attends Sportscaster U at Syracuse University". The Post-Standard. Archived from the original on October 17, 2021. Retrieved March 21, 2021. "Shaquille O'Neal set to graduate from New York Film Academy: NBA star wants to be a director". Daily News. August 16, 2011. Archived from the original on September 29, 2013. Retrieved August 5, 2013. "Going undercover -Shaq helps task force track Internet sex predators". Sports Illustrated. May 25, 2005. Archived from the original on May 27, 2005. Retrieved August 10, 2005. "Shaq sworn in as reserve police officer". NBCSports.com. Associated Press. December 10, 2005. Archived from the original on October 29, 2008. Retrieved March 22, 2009. "Second Man Arrested After Tip From Shaquille O'Neal". November 3, 2005. Archived from the original on July 14, 2009. Balko, Radley (July 9, 2013). "Chapter 8: THE 2000s- A WHOLE NEW WAR". Rise of the Warrior Cop: The Militarization of America's Police Forces. PublicAffairs. pp. 288–289. ISBN 978-1-61039-212-9. Kindle Location 5188 Sidener, Carrie J. (June 25, 2008). "Bedford severs ties to Shaquille O'Neal". NewsAdvance.com. Archived from the original on July 15, 2021. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Sheriff wants Shaq's badges back after Kobe rap". ESPN. June 24, 2008. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Shaq becomes reserve police officer in Florida". January 21, 2015. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Brett, Jennifer. "Shaq is now a sheriff's deputy in Georgia". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on December 6, 2016. Retrieved December 6, 2016. "Blue Chips (1994) – Film Review from". Film4. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved August 5, 2010. "Kazaam Movie Reviews, Pictures". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on July 13, 2010. Retrieved August 5, 2010. Army Archerd (August 23, 2001). "Touchy topic addressed in upcoming pix". Variety. Archived from the original on December 6, 2008. Retrieved April 6, 2008. "Shaquille O'Neal". Behind the Voice Actors. Archived from the original on August 5, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2016. "The NBA Live Wiki – Covers". Archived from the original on August 28, 2011. "Shaq to Grace Cover of NBA 2K6". IGN. August 15, 2005. Archived from the original on August 6, 2007. Retrieved May 7, 2012. G., Matt. "Shaq Stays as Cover Athlete for NBA 2K7". Planet Xbox 360. Archived from the original on June 7, 2012. Retrieved May 7, 2012. "Midway Games Signs Shaquille O'Neal for NBA Showtime: NBA on NBC". October 7, 1999. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved May 7, 2012. "What the Hell Happened?". Next Generation. No. 40. Imagine Media. April 1998. p. 45. Sarkar, Samit (March 6, 2014). "Shaquille O'Neal funding Shaq Fu sequel on Indiegogo for $450K". Polygon. Archived from the original on May 20, 2018. Retrieved May 19, 2018. "STARBRIGHT® FOUNDATION LAUNCHES QUEST FOR THE CODE™, A STAR-STUDDED INTERACTIVE CD-ROM GAME FOR CHILDREN WITH ASTHMA". May 28, 2002. Archived from the original on February 21, 2003. Retrieved February 5, 2023. Cernea, Mihail (May 26, 2010). "Shaquille O'Neal Is a Playable Fighter in UFC Undisputed 2010". Softpedia. Archived from the original on December 12, 2013. Retrieved May 7, 2012. "Shaquille O'Neal & Lucille Harrison". applepiemovie.com. Archived from the original on August 31, 2012. Retrieved August 11, 2012. ""Apple Pie" and mom on Mother's Day". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 16, 2014. Retrieved August 11, 2012. "Shaquille (TV series 2005)". IMDb. May 24, 2005. Archived from the original on July 29, 2015. Retrieved August 11, 2012. "Shaq's Big Challenge (2007)". IMDb. June 26, 2007. Archived from the original on August 11, 2012. Retrieved August 11, 2012. "NBA Ballers: Phenom Characters". giantbomb.com. Archived from the original on October 30, 2023. Retrieved August 11, 2012. "Motorcycle Mania 2 (2004)". blockbuster.com. Archived from the original on March 13, 2011. Caruso, Andrea. "American Idol's Ryan Seacrest Gives Back to Idol Gives Back". voices.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved August 11, 2012. Blackmon, Joe. "Shaquille O'Neal On Fear Factor". Reality TV Magazine. Archived from the original on November 7, 2011. Retrieved August 11, 2012. "Jackass | Jason "Wee-Man" Acuna". mtv.ca. Retrieved August 11, 2012.[permanent dead link] "Shaq takes out Big Show on Raw". wwe.com. Archived from the original on March 30, 2012. Retrieved August 11, 2012. "Punk'd – Season 5 – Episode 8". muchmusic.com. Archived from the original on August 15, 2013. Retrieved August 11, 2012. Shaquille O'Neal at IMDb Levin, Gary (July 20, 2009). "O'Neal courts competition on new reality show 'Shaq Vs.'". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 5, 2010. Retrieved August 11, 2012. "Shaq to star in TV sports reality series – NBA". ESPN. July 21, 2009. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved August 5, 2010. Shaq (July 14, 2011). "Life's Moments". TOUT. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2012. Kang, Byeong-jin (August 12, 2015). "NBA 스타 샤킬 오닐, '학교 다녀오겠습니다' 출연한다". The Huffington Post Korea. Archived from the original on September 21, 2015. Retrieved August 14, 2015. "Shaquille O'Neal and Chu Sung Hoon to Guest on "Off to School"". soompi. August 12, 2015. Archived from the original on September 14, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2015. Smiley, Brett (September 2, 2015). "Watch: Shaq fist-bumps giddy students in return to high school on Korean TV show". foxsports. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2015. Heck, Jordan (September 2, 2015). "Shaq became high school student for Korean TV show". sportingnews. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2015. Chavkin, Daniel. "TNT Announces 'Inside the NBA' Crew's Future Amid Charles Barkley Contract". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 19, 2022. Hendricks, Maggie (May 6, 2009). "Shaquille O'Neal: hoopster, twitter fan, MMA fighter?". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on May 11, 2009. Retrieved July 22, 2009. "Hong Man Choi Accepts Shaquille O'Neal's Mixed Martial Arts Challenge – MMA Fighting". Mma.fanhouse.com. October 21, 2009. Archived from the original on December 8, 2009. Retrieved August 5, 2010. "Shaquille O'Neal Takes in UFC 118 Still Wants to Fight Hong Man Choi". www.mmafighting.com. August 28, 2010. Archived from the original on August 30, 2010. Retrieved August 29, 2010. Casey, Connor (December 9, 2020). "Watch: Shaq's First Appearance on AEW Dynamite Ended Badly". Comic Book.com. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Satin, Ryan (August 24, 2020). "Shaquille O'Neal Wants To Wrestle Cody Rhodes In AEW". Pro Wrestling Sheet. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved December 7, 2020. Gelston, Dan (March 1, 2021). "Shaq Attack: O'Neal ready to rumble in tag match for AEW". National Basketball Association. Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 3, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2021. "Here's A Portrait Of Shaquille O'Neal And Hulk Hogan In New York City On 9/11". October 24, 2012. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2016. "Shaquille O'Neal hosts 'Monday Night Raw,' gets physical". Archived from the original on September 8, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2017. "PWTorch.com – TNA News: Impact news & notes – Shaq one-segment appearance, TV Title status, next week's theme, more". pwtorch.com. Archived from the original on April 24, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2016. "Shaquille O'Neal entered the Andre the Giant Memorial Battle Royal at WrestleMania 32". Archived from the original on January 14, 2018. Retrieved January 14, 2018. "Diot's WWE WrestleMania 32 Review – 411MANIA". 411mania.com. Archived from the original on March 6, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2016. Mrosko, Geno (July 13, 2016). "Show challenges Shaq to a match at WrestleMania 33". Cageside Seats. Archived from the original on January 14, 2018. Retrieved January 14, 2018. Bieler, Dan (July 16, 2016). "Shaquille O'Neal accepts WrestleMania challenge from Big Show". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Van Vliet, Chris (November 16, 2016). "WWE's Big Show talks to Deco, teases WrestleMania 33". WSVN. Archived from the original on January 12, 2017. Retrieved January 10, 2017. "Shaquille O'Neal calls out Big Show". WWE. January 10, 2017. Archived from the original on January 12, 2017. Retrieved January 10, 2017. WWE.com Staff (January 15, 2017). "Big Show tweets out his incredible physique as he prepares for WrestleMania". WWE. Archived from the original on March 25, 2017. Retrieved January 16, 2017. Gerweck, Steve (March 14, 2017). "Reason why WWE canceled Shaq vs Big Show at WrestleMania 33". Gerweck.net. Archived from the original on August 24, 2017. Retrieved March 20, 2017. "Big Show Thinks Braun Strowman Will Be One Of The All-Time Greats". January 12, 2018. Archived from the original on October 30, 2023. Retrieved January 14, 2018. Lambert, Jeremy (November 11, 2020). "Jade Cargill Makes Debut On AEW Dynamite, Teases The Arrival Of Shaquille O'Neal". Fightful. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved November 11, 2020. Renner, Ethan (November 11, 2020). "Shaquille O'Neal AEW debut teased on Dynamite". Figure Four Online. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved November 17, 2020. "Full Gear Fall Out" – Being The Elite Ep. 229. YouTube. Being The Elite. November 9, 2020. Event occurs at 21:50–22:00. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved December 7, 2020. Dangoor, Louis (November 12, 2020). "Shaquille O'Neal Was Backstage At AEW Full Gear". WrestleTalk. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved November 17, 2020. Pritchard, Bill (November 29, 2020). "The Young Bucks: Shaq Gave Us A Standing Ovation For FTR Match, His AEW Appearance Will Bring New Fans". Wrestlezone. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved December 7, 2020. All Elite Wrestling [@AEW] (December 8, 2020). "BREAKING NEWS @Shaq addresses #AEW with @tonyschiavone24! Watch #AEWDynamite this Wednesday night on @TNTDrama 8e/7c or http://AEWPlus.com by @FiteTV for our International fans. #AEWonTNT" (Tweet). Retrieved December 7, 2020 – via Twitter. Bleacher Report [@BleacherReport] (December 10, 2020). ".@SHAQ's first appearance on AEW was comedy Rolling on the floor laughing *NSFW*" (Tweet). Retrieved December 10, 2020 – via Twitter. Nason, Josh (December 9, 2020). "Brandi Rhodes throws water, swears at Shaq on AEW Dynamite". Figure Four Online. Archived from the original on December 17, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. Sulla-Heffinger, Anthony (March 3, 2021). "Watch: Shaq goes through tables, wins in mixed tag-team match on AEW". Yahoo. Archived from the original on March 4, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2021. McCarriston, Shanna (March 3, 2021). "Shaquille O'Neal on AEW: Shaq goes through a table and picks up a win in his All Elite Wrestling debut". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on March 4, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2021. Hernández, Belén (June 23, 2022). "Shaquille O'Neal, the king of franchises: 155 burger joints, 40 gyms and a $400 million fortune". El Pais. Archived from the original on December 30, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2022. TELIS DEMOS (June 12, 2015). "Shaq Attacks IPO Access, Invests in Loyal3". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on June 15, 2015. Retrieved June 13, 2015. Schlueb, Mark (June 11, 2008). "Shaq: I can help homeowners fight off foreclosure". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on June 13, 2008. Retrieved June 11, 2008. "One River View at Rector". Emporis. Archived from the original on January 7, 2014. Retrieved December 8, 2013. Haddon, Heather (September 26, 2013). "Star Comes Home to Build in Newark Shaquille O'Neal in Real Estate Development Partnership". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on February 19, 2014. Retrieved March 14, 2017. Munson, John (September 27, 2013). "Shaq comes back to Newark to break ground for city's first high-rise apartment in more than 50 years". The Star-Ledger. Archived from the original on January 7, 2014. Retrieved March 22, 2014. "Booker, Shaquille O'Neal and other dignitaries break ground on new high-rise apartments". Essex News Daily. September 30, 2013. Archived from the original on January 7, 2014. Retrieved December 8, 2013. "New Jersey Economic Development Authority: Urban Transit Hub Tax Credit Program: Approved Projects" (PDF). Mjeda.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 30, 2013. Retrieved February 23, 2016. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, pp. 263–4. "Shaquille O'Neal buys a stake in the Sacramento Kings". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 8, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2017. "Shaquille O'Neal officially sells his stake in Sacramento Kings, walks away from 'our great partnership'". ESPN. January 12, 2022. Archived from the original on January 13, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2022. "Shaq, A-Rod, Rollins invest in esports team". March 18, 2016. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. "ELEAGUE have brought back Shaq's memorable acting skills". May 18, 2016. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Chambers, Brianna. "Shaquille O'Neal buys Krispy Kreme store". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 6, 2016. Greenburg, Zack. "Shaq's Fun House: A Super-Size Super Bowl Party With Long-Term Ambitions". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 17, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2019. "Meet the L.A. company behind Shaq's Fun House Super Bowl party". Los Angeles Times. February 12, 2022. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Gardner, Chris (January 5, 2022). "Shaquille O'Neal on Crypto Craze and Bringing Shaq's Fun House to L.A. on Super Bowl Weekend". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Meyersohn, Nathaniel (March 22, 2019). "Shaq is joining Papa John's board of directors". CNN Business. Archived from the original on March 22, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2019. "Papa John's and Shaquille O'Neal Launch New Shap-a-roni Pizza" (Press release). Papa John's. June 29, 2020. Archived from the original on November 23, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023. Florio, Mike (November 16, 2022). "Tom Brady is sued in connection with FTX collapse". ProFootballTalk. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022. Retrieved November 16, 2022. Zeitchik, Steven; Mark, Julian (December 14, 2022). "Tom Brady pushed crypto to his fans. This lawyer wants him to pay up". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 14, 2022. Retrieved December 14, 2022. Scipioni, Jade; Albert-Deitch, Cameron (December 15, 2022). "Shaq distances himself from crypto and FTX collapse: 'I was just a paid spokesperson'". CNBC. Archived from the original on December 15, 2022. Retrieved December 15, 2022. Lawler, Richard (February 18, 2022). "Influencers beware: promoting the wrong crypto could mean facing a class-action lawsuit". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on July 18, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. "Shaqtoberfest brings Halloween to Long Beach alongside the Queen Mary". abc7.com. October 19, 2022. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved September 7, 2023. "Lakers News: Shaqtoberfest Invades Long Beach". si.com. October 15, 2022. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved September 7, 2023. "Reebok names Shaquille O'Neal president of basketball, Allen Iverson as VP". sports.yahoo.com. October 12, 2023. Archived from the original on January 7, 2024. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "EXCLUSIVE: Shaquille O'Neal Accused Of Computer Hacking, Throwing Evidence In Lake, Says New Lawsuit | Radar Online". RadarOnline. September 15, 2010. Archived from the original on December 27, 2020. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Shaq Smacked With Kiddie Porn Frame-Up Lawsuit". NBC 6 South Florida. September 15, 2010. Archived from the original on July 15, 2021. Retrieved December 28, 2020. Munzenrieder, Kyle (September 15, 2010). "Shaq Hit With Lawsuit For Attempting to Plant Child Porn on Former Employee's Computer". Miami New Times. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved December 28, 2020. King, James (September 16, 2010). "Shaq Sued by Former Employee for Allegedly Hacking Into Computer to Destroy Evidence of Affairs – and Reputedly Attempting to Frame Employee for Possessing Kiddy Porn". Phoenix New Times. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Former Employee Says Shaq Took Up Computer Hacking, Threw Evidence in a Lake". Intelligencer. September 15, 2010. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "SHAQUILLE O'NEAL, vs SHAWN DARLING AND MENACHEM MAYBERG". Justia Law. Archived from the original on March 9, 2022. Retrieved March 9, 2022. HARTMAN, MADISON (August 2014). "Ex-NBA star Shaquille O'Neal, two others being sued by man with rare genetic disease who was mocked via social media". New York Daily News. Retrieved December 27, 2020. "Shaq Makes Fun Of Disabled Man – YouTube". www.youtube.com. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved December 27, 2020. "Binion v. O'Neal, CASE NO. 15-60869-CIV-COHN/SELTZER | Casetext Search + Citator". casetext.com. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Turkish rookie Semih Erden thankful for Shaq". Boston Herald. November 18, 2018. Archived from the original on August 5, 2023. Retrieved August 5, 2023. "The Shaq Factor". Sports Illustrated. June 17, 2002. Archived from the original on September 30, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2023. Wright, Robin (August 1, 2011). "Rock the Casbah". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 23, 2013. Brown, Tim (January 11, 2003). "O'Neal Issues Apology". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 7, 2012. Brown, Tim; Plaschke, Bill (May 29, 2002). "Shaq and Hedo Share a Moment". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 2, 2013. Alison Kugel (November 11, 2011). "Shaquille O'Neal Talks Kobe Bryant, Pat Riley & NBA Politics: 'I Did It My Way'". PR.com. Retrieved February 22, 2013. Tim Brown (April 20, 2003). "Shaq, Wife Have a Baby Boy". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 24, 2021. "Daughter is sixth child for Shaq, wife". ESPN. May 1, 2006. Retrieved October 24, 2021. "Shaq and wife welcome new daughter". United Press International. May 1, 2006. Retrieved October 24, 2021. Sam Smith (December 16, 1996). "HO, HO, SHAQ'S ON WAY". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 23, 2021. "TRIVIA Q&A". Tampa Bay Times. September 30, 2005. Retrieved October 23, 2021. O'Neal, MacMullan 2011, p. 209. Maria (December 23, 2022). "Who is Shaquille O'neal's Ex-Wife & Dating in 2022?". Retrieved December 28, 2022. "Why Shaquille O'Neal Blames Himself for Divorce From Ex-Wife Shaunie". E! Online. April 20, 2022. Retrieved December 28, 2022. Brooke, Tyler. "Shaquille O'Neal's Son Shareef O'Neal Does Not Play Like His Dad". Bleacher Report. "Watch: Shaq's son dominates as a high school freshman". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved May 13, 2015. Lundberg, Robin (January 22, 2021). "Shareef O'Neal Transferring to LSU, Talks Final Text From Kobe". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved February 15, 2020. Goldstein, Meredith (February 3, 2011). "Hoopz is right at home with Shaq". The Boston Globe. Retrieved August 9, 2011. Dwyer, Kelly (May 21, 2011). "Shaquille O'Neal's girlfriend schools him on sleep apnea". Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved August 9, 2011. Goldstein, Meredith (February 3, 2011). "Keeping up with Shaq". Boston.com. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Daniels, Sharifa (August 28, 2012). "Shaquille O'Neal and Nicole "Hoopz" Break Up Following Outburst". Vibe. Shanahan, Mark; Goldstein, Meredith (August 25, 2012). "Former Sudbury couple 'Hoopz' and Shaq call it quits". The Boston Globe. Retrieved October 23, 2021. Toland, Jennifer (July 15, 2017). "Shaq keeps her on go, but still no place like home for Laticia Rolle". "EXCLUSIVE: Have Shaq & Girlfriend Laticia Rolle Called It QUITS?!". TheYBF. July 1, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2021. "Shaq covers Mikan's funeral expenses". ESPN. Associated Press. June 3, 2005. Retrieved July 12, 2021. Delli Santi, Angela (February 3, 2009). "Stars headline in the second class of N.J. Hall of Fame". Daily Record. Associated Press. p. A6. Retrieved May 31, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Chris Hodapp (June 12, 2011). "Freemasons For Dummies: Brother Shaquille O'Neal". Freemasonsfordummies.blogspot.com. Retrieved August 10, 2012. "Shaquille O'Neal: Freemason". YouTube. February 27, 2011. Archived from the original on April 1, 2014. Retrieved February 23, 2016. "Shaquille O'Neal Show off His Freemason Ring on NBATV". Beginning And End. January 14, 2012. Retrieved February 23, 2016. "Shaquille O'Neal Proudly Shows Off Illuminati Ring and Being a Freemason [VIDEO] | AT2W". Atoast2wealth.com. January 14, 2012. Archived from the original on January 20, 2012. Retrieved February 23, 2016. "Wilkins Honored as One of 35 Greatest McDonald's All Americans". NBA. January 31, 2012. Retrieved February 9, 2012. John S. (August 15, 2017). "Shaq Mourns the Loss of His Stepfather: I Wouldn't Be Here Without You". VladTV. Retrieved March 10, 2022. Wyshynski, Greg (November 3, 2008). "Video: Shaquille O'Neal, New Jersey Devils fan – Puck Daddy – NHL Blog – Yahoo! Sports". Sports.yahoo.com. Retrieved February 23, 2016. "Shaq drives the Zamboni in Newark". YouTube. January 11, 2014. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2016. "NBA legend Shaquille O'Neal celebrates Northampton's promotion". April 5, 2016. "Is Shaq (Shaquille O'Neal a Dallas Cowboys fan?". Media Referee. January 24, 2023. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Neal J. Leitereg (May 20, 2016). "Shaquille O'Neal scores a two-house compound outside of Atlanta". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 22, 2022. McCalmont, Lucy (January 10, 2014). "Shaq backs Christie: 'I believe him'". Politico. Retrieved February 23, 2016. Medina, Mark (October 27, 2020). "Shaquille O'Neal explains why he had resisted voting before this year's election". USA Today. Retrieved July 28, 2021. Hathaway, Ashantai (August 30, 2021). "Shaq Says Upset Mom Who Slapped Money Out Of His Hand, Made Him Ultimately Turn Down $40M Shoe Deal". Black Enterprise. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Check out Shaquille O'Neal's new Challenger 650 with custom 'Dunkman' logo". Globalair.com. July 27, 2023. Retrieved August 2, 2023. "The Queen of Basketball" documentary produced by Shaquille O'Neal, Stephen Curry wins Oscar – ESPN.com "Raw Replays". network.wwe.com. Retrieved January 18, 2019. "Shaquille O'Neal makes debut as late-night TV host". nba.com. October 31, 2017. Retrieved November 1, 2017. Shaquille O'Neal at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Career statistics and player information from NBA.com  and Basketball-Reference.com Shaquille O'Neal at IMDb  Shaquille O'Neal's profile at Cagematch.net , Wrestlingdata.com , Internet Wrestling Database Shaquille O'Neal Archived September 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine at Louisiana State Portals:  Basketball  Biography  Sports