The All-Russian Hockey League (VHL) (Russian: Всероссийская хоккейная лига (ВХЛ), Vserossiyskaya hokkeinaya liga (VHL)), also known as the Major Hockey League or Higher Hockey League (HHL), is a professional ice hockey league in Eurasia, and the second highest level of Russian hockey. Though currently acting independently, plans were in place to convert it to a farm system for the Kontinental Hockey League (KHL)'s 2010–11 season. It was preceded by the Major League of the Russian Championship (Vysshaya Liga) that formerly held a relegation role for the Russian Superleague and was governed by the Ice Hockey Federation of Russia. As of the 2022–23 season, most VHL teams were affiliated with a KHL team (e.g., Khimik Voskresensk is affiliated with KHL's Spartak Moscow), while some teams of the VHL are not affiliated with a KHL team.[citation needed] The Russian Classic (Russian: Русская классика, Russkaya klassika) is an outdoor ice hockey game that is played during the Supreme Hockey League regular season. So far, the visiting team has won every edition of the game. Bolded teams denote winners Since its foundation in 2010, 40 different clubs have played in the VHL, and 34 of them have at least once qualified for the playoffs. Only one club (Toros Neftekamsk) has made the playoffs in all nine championships of the VHL, reaching the semi-final stage six times. The table gives the final regular season ranks for all teams, with the playoff performance encoded in colors. The teams are ordered by their best championship results. Kontinental Hockey League VHL-B Junior Hockey League National Junior Hockey League Supreme Hockey League TV-VHL on YouTube "League Structure". KHL. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2013. "Medical Support For All". Kontinental Hockey League. 26 June 2010. Retrieved 26 June 2010. "The press conference devoted to the start of the season of Higher Hockey League was". Ice Hockey Federation of Russia. Archived from the original on 12 October 2011. Retrieved 16 October 2011. "Учреждение ВХЛ". KHL.ru. Retrieved 4 April 2010. VHL Official (in Russian) VHL Official (in Chinese) VHL Official AllHockey.Ru Euro Hockey