The 2009 European Women Basketball Championship, commonly called EuroBasket Women 2009, was the 32nd regional championship held by FIBA Europe. The competition was held in Latvia from June 7 to June 20, 2009.  Latvia – as host.  Russia,  Spain,  Belarus,  Czech Republic – top 5 in EuroBasket Women 2007.  Israel,  Lithuania – top two teams in Group A.  Turkey,  Poland – top two teams in Group B.  France,  Slovakia – top two teams in Group C.  Greece,  Serbia – top two teams in Group D.  Hungary – best third team.  Ukraine,  Italy – winners of Group A and Group B of the Additional qualifying round. At the start of tournament, all 16 participating countries had 12 players on their roster. The tournament will be held in three cities. The Preliminary round will be played at Liepāja and Valmiera, while the Qualifying and Final Round will be played at Riga. The 16 participants will be divided into four groups of four teams each. The top three teams in each group will advance to the qualifying round. The last team will be eliminated. There will be two groups of six teams, each composed of the qualifiers from two Preliminary round groups. The results in the preliminary round will be taken into account. Each team will play the teams that qualified from the other group. The top four teams will advance to the quarterfinals. The bottom two teams will be eliminated. This stage will be played in a knock-out system. In the quarterfinals, the first team in one group will play the fourth team in the other group, while the second place team will play against the third team in the opposite group. The winners of the quarterfinals will advance to the semifinals, and the winners of the semis will progress to the finals. The losers in the quarterfinals will play for fifth to eighth places. All EuroBasket Women 2009 team: Svetlana Abrosimova ( Russia) Anete Jēkabsone-Žogota( Latvia) Sandrine Gruda ( France) Céline Dumerc ( France) Evanthia Maltsi ( Greece) The teams qualified to 2010 FIBA World Championship for Women in the Czech Republic are:  France  Russia  Spain  Belarus  Greece  Czech Republic as host nation EuroBasket 2009 "FIBA Europe approves Eurobasket 2009 venues". Retrieved 21 April 2023. "2009 EuroBasket Women". archive.fiba.com. Retrieved 21 April 2023. EuroBasket Women 2009 EuroBasket Women EuroBasket 2009 Women FIBA Europe – EuroBasket Women Archived 2008-07-23 at the Wayback Machine