Historical sources encompass "every kind of evidence that human beings have left of their past activities — the written word and spoken word, the shape of the landscape and the material artefact, the fine arts as well as photography and film." While the range of potential historical sources has expanded to include many non-documentary sources, nevertheless "the study of history has nearly always been based squarely on what the historian can read in documents or hear from informants". Historical sources are usually divided into primary and secondary, though some historians also refer to tertiary sources. In the study of history as an academic discipline, a "primary source" (also called an "original source") is a first hand account of events by someone who lived through them. "Primary sources were made during the historical period that is being investigated." In scholarship, a secondary source is a document or recording that relates or discusses information originally presented elsewhere. A secondary source is one that gives information about a primary source. In a secondary source, the original information is selected, modified and arranged in a suitable format. Secondary sources involve generalization, analysis, interpretation, or evaluation of the original information. A tertiary source is an index or textual consolidation of already published primary and secondary sources that does not provide additional interpretations or analysis of the sources. Some tertiary sources can be used as an aid to find key (seminal) sources, key terms, general common knowledge and established mainstream science on a topic. The exact definition of tertiary varies by academic field. Historical document Archive What are Historical Sources? - University of Cambridge Faculty of History Tosh, John. 1999. The Pursuit of History. 3rd Ed. Longman. p. 36 Tosh, John. 1999. The Pursuit of History. 3rd Ed. Longman. p. 37 https://www.historyskills.com/source-criticism/analysis/source-kind-and-type/ "Primary, secondary and tertiary sources". University Libraries, University of Maryland. "Secondary sources Archived 2014-11-06 at the Wayback Machine". James Cook University. Primary, secondary and tertiary sources. Archived 2013-07-03 at the Wayback Machine". University Libraries, University of Maryland. Retrieve 07/26/2013 "Tertiary Information Sources". Old Dominion University -- ODU Libraries. September 2012. Retrieved 20 June 2013. "Tertiary sources Archived 2014-11-06 at the Wayback Machine". James Cook University. "Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary Resources". University of New Haven.