Miley Ray Cyrus (/ˈmaɪli ˈsaɪrəs/, MY-lee SY-rəs; born Destiny Hope Cyrus, November 23, 1992) is an American singer, songwriter, and actress. She has been recognized for her evolving artistry and hailed as the "Teen Queen" of the 2000s era. She is also cited as one of the few examples of a child star with a successful music career as an adult. As the daughter of country singer Billy Ray Cyrus, she emerged as a teen idol at age 13 as the lead character in the Disney Channel television series Hannah Montana (2006–2011). As Hannah Montana, she achieved success on the Billboard charts with two number-one soundtracks and a US top-ten single. Her solo career started with the US number-one albums Meet Miley Cyrus (2007) and Breakout (2008); featuring the top-ten singles "See You Again" and "7 Things". The EP The Time of Our Lives (2009) reached number two in the US while its lead single "Party in the U.S.A." became one of the best-selling singles of all time in the country and was later certified diamond by the RIAA. The ballad "The Climb", also reached number four in the US. Trying to recalibrate her image, she explored dance-pop in Can't Be Tamed (2010), which received mixed reviews; however, its title track reached the top-ten in the US. She later signed with RCA Records and took a new artistic direction with the hip-hop and R&B-influenced Bangerz (2013), which became her fifth chart-topping album. Featuring the singles "We Can't Stop" and her first Billboard Hot 100 number-one "Wrecking Ball", it earned Cyrus her first Grammy Award nomination. She then dabbled in diverse genres with albums like Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz (2015), Younger Now (2017) and Plastic Hearts (2020). After signing with Columbia Records in 2021, Cyrus released Endless Summer Vacation (2023). Its lead single "Flowers" set various records and marked her second US number-one. The song won two Grammy Awards including Record of the Year and the album was nominated for Album of the Year. Apart from music, Cyrus starred in the films Bolt (2008), Hannah Montana: The Movie (2009), The Last Song (2010), LOL (2012), and So Undercover (2013), and appeared briefly in Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 (2017) and Drive-Away Dolls (2024). On television, she led and produced the documentary, Miley: The Movement (2013), served as a coach on The Voice (2016–2017), starred in the "Rachel, Jack and Ashley Too" episode from the Netflix series Black Mirror (2019), hosts the yearly NBC holiday special Miley's New Year's Eve Party (2021–present), and starred in and executive produced the Disney+ documentary concert special, Endless Summer Vacation (Backyard Sessions) (2023). In 2014, she founded the non-profit Happy Hippie Foundation, which was supported by the web video series Backyard Sessions (2012–2023). Cyrus has received numerous accolades, including two Grammy Awards, one Brit Award, five Billboard Music Awards, three MTV Video Music Awards, and eight Guinness World Records. She has appeared in listicles such as the Time 100 (2008 and 2014) and Forbes 30 Under 30 (2014 and 2021). Billboard ranked her as the ninth-greatest Billboard 200 female artist and the 62nd greatest artist of all time. Cyrus is the eighth highest-certified female digital singles artist by the RIAA, and one of the most successful artists of the 2010s by Billboard. Destiny Hope Cyrus was born November 23, 1992, in Franklin, Tennessee, to Leticia "Tish" Jean Cyrus (née Finley) and country singer Billy Ray Cyrus. She was born with supraventricular tachycardia, a condition causing an abnormal resting heart rate. Her birth name, Destiny Hope, expressed her parents' belief that she would accomplish great things. Her parents nicknamed her "Smiley", which they later shortened to "Miley", because she often smiled as an infant. In 2008, she legally changed her name to Miley Ray Cyrus; her middle name honors her grandfather, Democratic politician Ronald Ray Cyrus, who was from Kentucky. Cyrus's godmother is singer-songwriter Dolly Parton. Against the advice of her father's record company, Cyrus's parents secretly married on December 28, 1993, a year after her birth. They had two more children, son Braison and daughter Noah. From a previous relationship, her mother has two other children, Brandi and Trace. Her father's first child, Christopher Cody, was born in April 1992 and grew up separately with his mother, waitress Kristin Luckey, in South Carolina. All of Cyrus's maternal siblings are established entertainers. Trace is a vocalist and guitarist for the electronic pop band Metro Station. Noah is an actress and, along with Braison, models, sings, and is a songwriter. Brandi was formerly a musician for the indie rock band Frank + Derol and is a professional DJ. The Cyrus farmhouse is located on 500 acres of land outside Nashville. Cyrus attended Heritage Elementary School in Williamson County while she and her family lived in Thompson's Station, Tennessee. When she was cast in Hannah Montana, the family moved to Los Angeles and she attended Options for Youth Charter Schools studying with a private tutor on set. Raised as a Christian, she was baptized in a Southern Baptist church before moving to Hollywood in 2005. She attended church regularly while growing up and wore a purity ring. In 2001, when Cyrus was eight, she and her family moved to Toronto, Canada, while her father filmed the television series Doc. After Billy Ray Cyrus took her to see a 2001 Mirvish production of Mamma Mia! at the Royal Alexandra Theatre, Miley Cyrus grabbed his arm and told him, "This is what I want to do, daddy. I want to be an actress." She began to take singing and acting lessons at the Armstrong Acting Studio in Toronto. Cyrus's first acting role was as Kylie in her father's television series Doc. In 2003, she received credit under her birth name for her role as "Young Ruthie" in Tim Burton's Big Fish. During this period she auditioned with Taylor Lautner for the feature film The Adventures of Sharkboy and Lavagirl in 3-D. Although she was one of two finalists for the role, she chose to appear in Hannah Montana instead. Her mother took on the role of Miley's manager and worked to acquire a team to build her daughter's career. Cyrus signed with Mitchell Gossett, director of the youth division at Cunningham Escott Slevin Doherty. Gossett is often credited with "discovering" Cyrus and played a key role in her auditioning for Hannah Montana. She later signed with Jason Morey of Morey Management Group to handle her music career; Dolly Parton steered her to him. She hired her father's finance manager as part of her team. Cyrus auditioned for the Disney Channel television series Hannah Montana when she was thirteen years old. She auditioned for the role of the title character's best friend, but was called to audition for the lead role instead seeing her performance. Despite being denied the part at first because she was "too small and too young" for the role, she was later cast as the lead because of her singing and goofy acting abilities. The series premiered in March 2006 to the largest audience for a Disney Channel program and quickly ranked among the highest-rated series on basic cable. The success of the series led to Cyrus being labeled a "teen idol." She toured with the Cheetah Girls as Hannah Montana in September 2006 and performed songs from the show's first season. Walt Disney Records released a soundtrack credited to Cyrus's character in October of that year. The record was a commercial success, topping the Billboard 200 chart in the United States; it went on to sell over three million copies worldwide. With the release of the soundtrack, Cyrus became the first act within the Walt Disney Company to have deals in television, film, consumer products, and music. Cyrus signed a four-album deal with Hollywood Records to distribute her non-Hannah Montana soundtrack music. She released the two-disc album Hannah Montana 2: Meet Miley Cyrus in June 2007. The first disc was credited as the second soundtrack by "Hannah Montana", while the second disc served as Cyrus's debut studio album. The album became her second to reach the top of the Billboard 200, and has sold over three million copies. Months after the release of the project, "See You Again" (2007) was released as the lead single from the album. The song was a commercial success, and has sold over two million copies in the United States since its release. She collaborated with her father on the single "Ready, Set, Don't Go" (2007). Next Cyrus embarked on her highly successful Best of Both Worlds Tour (2007–08) to promote its release. Ticketmaster officials commented that "there [hadn't] been a demand of this level or intensity since The Beatles or Elvis." The tour's success led to the theatrical release of the 3D concert film Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus: Best of Both Worlds Concert (2008). While initially intended to be a limited release, the film's success led to a longer run. Cyrus and friend Mandy Jiroux began posting videos on YouTube in February 2008, referring to the clips as "The Miley and Mandy Show"; the videos garnered a large online following. In April 2008, several pictures of Cyrus in her underwear and swimsuit were leaked online by a teenager who hacked her Gmail account. Further controversy erupted when it was reported that the then-15-year-old Cyrus had posed topless during a photo shoot by Annie Leibovitz for Vanity Fair. The New York Times subsequently clarified that although the shot left the impression that Cyrus was bare-breasted, she was wrapped in a bed sheet and was not topless. Cyrus went on to release her second studio album, Breakout (2008), in June of that year. The album earned the highest first-week sales of her career thus far and became her third to top the Billboard 200. Cyrus later starred with John Travolta in the animated film Bolt (2008), her debut as a film actress; she also co-wrote the song "I Thought I Lost You" (2008) for the film, which she sings as a duet with Travolta. The film was a critical and commercial success and earned her a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Original Song. In March 2009, Cyrus released "The Climb" (2009) as a single from the soundtrack to the Hannah Montana feature film. It was met with a warm critical and commercial reaction, becoming a crossover hit in both pop and country music formats. The soundtrack, which features the single, went on to become Cyrus's fourth entry to top the Billboard 200; at age 16, she became the youngest artist in history to have four number-one albums on the chart. She released her fourth soundtrack as Hannah Montana in July 2009, which debuted at number two on the Billboard 200. Cyrus later launched her first fashion line, Miley Cyrus and Max Azria, through Walmart. It was promoted by the release of "Party in the U.S.A." (2009) and the EP The Time of Our Lives (2009). Cyrus said the record was "a transitioning album [...] really to introduce people to what I want my next record to sound like and with time I will be able to do that a little more." "Party in the U.S.A." became one of Cyrus's most successful singles to date and is considered to be one of her signature songs. She embarked on her first world tour, the Wonder World Tour (2009) which was a critical and commercial success. On December 7, 2009, Cyrus performed for Queen Elizabeth II and other members of the British royal family at the Royal Variety Performance in Blackpool, Lancashire. Billboard ranked her as the fourth best-selling female artist of 2009. Hoping to foster a more mature image, Cyrus starred in the film The Last Song (2010), based on the Nicholas Sparks novel. It was met with negative critical reviews but was a box office hit. Cyrus further attempted to shift her image with the release of her third studio album, Can't Be Tamed (2010). The album featured a more dance-oriented sound than her prior releases and stirred a considerable amount of controversy over its lyrical content and Cyrus's live performances. It sold 106,000 copies in its first week of release and became her first studio album not to top the Billboard 200 chart in the United States. The album's second and final single, "Who Owns My Heart" was released solely in German territories.[citation needed] Cyrus released her final soundtrack as Hannah Montana that October; it was a commercial failure.[citation needed] Cyrus was the subject of further controversy when a video posted online in December 2010 showed her, then aged eighteen, smoking salvia with a bong. 2010 ended with her ranking at number thirteen on the Forbes Celebrity 100 list. She embarked on her worldwide Gypsy Heart Tour in April 2011 which had no North American dates; she cited her various controversial moments as the reason, claiming that she only wanted to travel where she felt "the most love". Following the release of Can't Be Tamed, Cyrus officially parted ways with Hollywood Records. With her obligations to Hannah Montana fulfilled, Cyrus announced her plans to take a hiatus from music so she could focus on her acting career. She confirmed she would not be going to college. Cyrus hosted the March 5, 2011, episode of Saturday Night Live where she poked fun at her recent controversies. That November it was announced that Cyrus would be the voice of Mavis in the animated film Hotel Transylvania; however by February 2012 she was dropped from the project and replaced with Selena Gomez. At the time Cyrus said her reason for leaving the movie was wanting to work on her music; later it was revealed the real reason behind her exit was because she bought her then-boyfriend Liam Hemsworth a birthday cake shaped like a penis and licked it. She made an appearance on the MTV television series Punk'd with Kelly Osbourne and Khloé Kardashian. Cyrus starred alongside Demi Moore in the independent film LOL (2012). The film had a limited release; it was a critical and commercial failure. She starred in the comedy film So Undercover playing the role of an undercover FBI agent at a college sorority. Cyrus released a string of live performances known as the Backyard Sessions on YouTube during the spring and summer of 2012; the performances were of classic songs she personally liked. Having begun working on a failed fourth album the previous year, Cyrus resumed working on a new musical project in late 2012.[failed verification] She collaborated with producers Rock Mafia on their song "Morning Sun" (2012), which was made available for free download online. She had previously appeared in the music video for their debut single, "The Big Bang" (2010). Cyrus later provided guest vocals on "Decisions" (2012) by Borgore. Both Cyrus and Hemsworth appeared in the song's music video. She went on to guest star as Missi in two episodes of the CBS sitcom Two and a Half Men. Cyrus drew significant media attention when she cut her traditionally long, brown hair in favor of a blonde, pixie cut; she commented that she had "never felt more [herself] in [her] whole life" and that "it really changed [her] life." In 2013, Cyrus hired Larry Rudolph to be her manager, although she is currently managed by Maverick's Adam Leber; Rudolph is best known for representing Britney Spears. It was confirmed that Cyrus had signed with RCA Records for her future releases. She worked with producers such as Pharrell Williams and Mike Will Made-It on her fourth studio album, resulting in a hip hop-influenced sound. She collaborated with numerous hip hop artists releases and appeared on the Snoop Lion song "Ashtrays and Heartbreaks" (2013), released as the lead single from his twelfth studio album, Reincarnated. She collaborated with will.i.am on the song "Fall Down" (2013), released as a promotional single that same month. The song entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number fifty-eight, marking her first appearance on the chart since "Can't Be Tamed" (2010). She provided guest vocals on the Lil Twist song "Twerk", which also featured vocals by Justin Bieber. The song was unreleased for unknown reasons but leaked online. On May 23, 2013, it was confirmed that Cyrus would be featured on the Mike Will Made It single "23", with Wiz Khalifa and Juicy J. The single went on to peak at number eleven on the Hot 100, and had sold over one million copies worldwide as of 2013. Cyrus released her new single "We Can't Stop" on June 3. Touted as her comeback single, it became a worldwide commercial success, topping charts in territories such as the United Kingdom. The song's music video set the Vevo record for most views within twenty-four hours of release and became the first to reach 100 million views on the site. Cyrus performed with Robin Thicke at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards, a performance that resulted in widespread media attention and public scrutiny. Her simulated sex acts with a foam finger were described as "disturbing" and the whole performance as "cringe-worthy". Cyrus released "Wrecking Ball" (2013) as the second single from Bangerz on the same day as the VMAs. The accompanying music video, which showed her swinging naked on a wrecking ball, was viewed over nineteen million times within 24 hours of its release, and drew criticism from some for allegedly objectifying Cyrus, including fellow singer Sinéad O’Connor, who said that "you will obscure your talent by allowing yourself to be pimped, whether it's the music business or yourself doing the pimping". Despite this, the single became Cyrus's first to top the Hot 100 in the US, and maintained the #1 spot for three weeks. It sold over two million copies. On October 2, 2013, MTV aired the documentary Miley: The Movement, that chronicled the recording of her fourth studio album Bangerz, which was released on October 4. The album was a commercial success, debuting at number one on the Billboard 200 with first week sales of 270,000 copies. On October 5, Cyrus hosted Saturday Night Live for the second time. On November 5, Cyrus featured on rapper Future's "Real and True" with Mr. Hudson; an accompanying music video premiered five days later on November 10, 2013. In late 2013 she was declared Artist of the Year by MTV. On January 29, 2014, she played an acoustic concert show on MTV Unplugged, performing songs from Bangerz featuring a guest appearance by Madonna. It became the highest-rated MTV Unplugged in the past decade, with over 1.7 million streams. Cyrus was also featured in the Marc Jacobs Spring 2014 campaign along with Natalie Westling and Esmerelda Seay Reynolds. She launched her controversial Bangerz Tour (2014) that year, which was positively received by critics. Two months into her tour, Cyrus's Alaskan Klee Kai was found mauled to death at her home after fighting with a coyote. Two weeks later, Cyrus suffered an allergic reaction to the antibiotic cephalexin, prescribed to treat a sinus infection, resulting in her hospitalization in Kansas City. Though she rescheduled some of her US tour dates, she resumed the tour two weeks later, beginning with the European leg. While collaborating with the Flaming Lips on their remake of the Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, With a Little Help from My Fwends, Cyrus began working with Wayne Coyne on her fifth studio album. She said that she was taking her time to focus on the music, and that the album would not be released until she felt it was ready. Coyne compared his collaborative material with Cyrus to the catalogs of Pink Floyd and Portishead and described their sound as being "a slightly wiser, sadder, more true version" of Cyrus's pop music output. Cyrus also worked on the films The Night Before (2015) and A Very Murray Christmas (2015) during this period; both roles were cameos. Reports began to surface in 2015 that Cyrus was working on two albums simultaneously, one of which she hoped to release at no charge. This was confirmed by her manager who claimed she was willing to end her contract with RCA Records if they refused to let her release a free album. Cyrus was the host of the 2015 MTV Video Music Awards, making her its first openly pansexual host, and gave a surprise performance of a new song "Dooo It!" (2015) during the show's finale. Immediately following the performance, Cyrus announced that her fifth studio album, Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz (2015), was available for free streaming on SoundCloud. The album was written and produced primarily by Cyrus, and has been called experimental and psychedelic, with elements of psychedelic pop, psychedelic rock, and alternative pop. In 2016, following the release of her fifth studio album the previous year, Cyrus resumed working on her sixth studio effort. She was a key advisor during the tenth season of the reality singing competition The Voice. In March, Cyrus had signed on as a coach for the eleventh season of The Voice as a replacement for Gwen Stefani; Cyrus became the youngest coach to appear in any incarnation of the series. In September 2016, Cyrus co-starred in Crisis in Six Scenes, a television series Woody Allen created for Amazon Studios. She played a radical activist who causes chaos in a conservative 1960s household while hiding from the police. On September 17, 2016, she appeared on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon and covered Bob Dylan's "Baby, I'm In the Mood for You". Cyrus also had an uncredited voice cameo as Mainframe in the superhero film Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2, released in May 2017. On May 11, 2017, Cyrus released "Malibu" as the lead single from her sixth album. The single debuted at No. 64 on the Billboard Hot 100 and peaked at No. 10 on the chart on its second week. On June 9, Cyrus released "Inspired" after performing the song at the One Love Manchester benefit concert. It served as a promotional single from the album. On August 8, Cyrus announced that her sixth studio album would be titled Younger Now and would be released on September 29, 2017. The album's title track was released as the second single from the album on August 18 and debuted and peaked at No. 79 on the Billboard Hot 100. On August 27, Cyrus performed the track at the 2017 MTV Video Music Awards. On September 15, she performed "Malibu", "Younger Now", "See You Again", "Party in the U.S.A." and a cover of the Roberta Flack hit "The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face" (written by Ewan McColl) for the BBC Radio 1 Live Lounge. On October 2, as part of her one-week regular musical appearances on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, Cyrus sang her 2009 hit single "The Climb" for the first time since 2011 alongside a cover of "No Freedom" by Dido to honor the victims of the Las Vegas shooting. The former song has since been performed at multiple charity events, protests, and marches, including at the March For Our Lives demonstrations in Washington, D.C. That same year, Cyrus returned as a coach in the thirteenth season of The Voice after taking a one-season hiatus. On October 5, 2017, Cyrus confirmed that she would not be returning to The Voice for season fourteen. On October 30, 2017, Cyrus revealed she would not release any further singles from Younger Now, nor would she tour for it. Before the release of Younger Now in September 2017, Cyrus expressed she was "already two songs deep on the next [album]." Producers attached to her seventh studio album included previous collaborator Mike Will Made It and new collaborators Mark Ronson and Andrew Wyatt. Her first collaboration with Ronson, "Nothing Breaks Like a Heart" from his 2019 album Late Night Feelings, was released on November 29, 2018, to great commercial reception, especially in Europe, where it peaked at number two on the UK Singles Chart as well as in Ireland and topped the charts in several Eastern European countries including Hungary or Croatia. During the first quarter of 2019, Cyrus became quite notable for her cover songs. Having already taken part in MusiCares Person of the Year in 2018 celebrating Fleetwood Mac, she returned the year after to honor the career of her godmother Dolly Parton by performing "Islands in the Stream" alongside Canadian singer-songwriter Shawn Mendes, with who she also performed "In My Blood" a couple days later at the 61st Grammy Awards. Cyrus's other covers include her version of Ariana Grande's "No Tears Left to Cry" for BBC Radio's Live Lounge, her participation at the Chris Cornell tribute concert I Am The Highway, where she sang "As Hope & Promise Fade" as well as her cover record of Elton John's "Don't Let The Sun Go Down On Me", included in the tribute album Revamp: Reimagining the Songs of Elton John & Bernie Taupin. Cyrus also honored John at the I'm Still Standing: A Grammy Salute to Elton John tribute concert in 2018, where she covered "The Bitch Is Back". On May 31, 2019, Cyrus tweeted that her seventh studio album would be titled She Is Miley Cyrus and would comprise three six-song EPs, which would be released before the full-length album: She Is Coming on May 31, She Is Here in the summer, and She Is Everything in the fall. She Is Coming, which also included vocal collaborations with RuPaul, Swae Lee, Mike Will Made It and Ghostface Killah, debuted at number five on the US Billboard 200 with 36,000 album-equivalent units, while the lead single "Mother's Daughter" entered at number 54 on the US Billboard Hot 100. The Wuki remix of "Mother's Daughter" received a nomination for Best Remixed Recording at the 62nd Annual Grammy Awards while the original music video won two MTV Video Music Awards. Cyrus promoted the EP with a summer European tour that visited A-list festivals like Glastonbury and Primavera Sound. Cyrus starred in "Rachel, Jack and Ashley Too", an episode of the Netflix sci-fi series Black Mirror, which was filmed in South Africa in November 2018. It was released on Netflix on June 5, 2019. In the episode, she played fictional pop star Ashley O and voiced her AI doll extension, Ashley Too. The plot was compared to Britney Spears's conservatorship and the Free Britney movement, which Cyrus has been an advocate for. The music video for the song "On a Roll" from the episode was released on June 13; the song itself and the B-side "Right Where I Belong" were released to digital platforms the next day. On June 27, it was revealed that Cyrus had collaborated with Ariana Grande and Lana Del Rey on "Don't Call Me Angel", the lead single of the soundtrack to the 2019 film Charlie's Angels. It was released on September 13, 2019. In August 2019, Cyrus released "Slide Away", her first song since announcing her separation from then-husband Hemsworth. The song hinted at their breakup and contained lyrics such as "Move on, we're not 17, I'm not who I used to be". A music video was released in September 2019 that contained further references, including a ten of hearts playing card at the bottom of a pool to represent the end of her decade-long relationship with Hemsworth. On August 14, 2020, Cyrus released the lead single from her seventh studio album, "Midnight Sky" and confirmed the cancellation of the EPs She Is Here and She Is Everything due to major recent changes in her life that did not fit the essence of the project, including her divorce from Hemsworth, and the burning of the couple's house during the Woolsey Fire in California. "Midnight Sky" became her highest-charting solo single since "Malibu" in 2017, peaking at number 14 on the US Billboard Hot 100. Internationally, in the United Kingdom the song has thus far peaked at number five on the UK Singles Chart. The track was later mashed up with Stevie Nicks' "Edge of Seventeen". In October, Cyrus had a third Backyard Session on MTV and announced via Instagram that her seventh studio album Plastic Hearts would be released on November 27, 2020. It was previously intended to be called She Is Miley Cyrus, completing the EP series once finalized. The album was released to positive reviews from critics and performed well, debuting at number two on the Billboard 200, with 60,000 units, becoming her twelfth top ten entry on the chart. With that entry, Cyrus broke the record for attaining the most US Billboard 200 top-five albums in the 21st century by a female artist. Plastic Hearts marked a step of Cyrus into rock and glam rock music and spawned two other singles: "Prisoner" featuring English singer Dua Lipa and "Angels like You", which peaked at 8 and 66 respectively in the United Kingdom. The album also included vocal collaborations with Billy Idol and Joan Jett. Due to popular demand and social media virality, Cyrus included the live covers of Blondie's "Heart of Glass" and The Cranberries' "Zombie". Cyrus won a 2020 Webby Special Achievement Award. In February 2021, Cyrus performed at the very first TikTok Tailgate show in Tampa, for 7,500 vaccinated healthcare workers. It served as a pre-show before Super Bowl LV. It aired on TikTok and CBS. The performance was featured in the music video for "Angels like You". In March 2021, Cyrus departed RCA and signed with Columbia Records, a sister label of RCA under the Sony Music umbrella. That same month Cyrus embraced her days as Hannah Montana and wrote an open letter to the character on social media for the show's 15th anniversary, despite all statements that her days as Montana gave Cyrus an identity crisis. Rumors about a possible revival of the show have been around ever since. On April 23, 2021, The Kid Laroi released a remix of his single "Without You" featuring Cyrus, her first release under Columbia Records. On April 3, 2021, Cyrus performed at the NCAA March Madness Final Four in Indianapolis with the frontline health care workers in the audience. In May 2021, Cyrus signed an overall deal with NBCUniversal, including a first-look deal with her studio Hopetown Entertainment, as part of which she will develop projects for the company's outlets and star in three specials; with the first project off the deal being the Stand By You Pride concert special, which was released the following month on Peacock. In June, Cyrus released a studio cover version of Metallica's "Nothing Else Matters", which was included in The Metallica Blacklist, a tribute album to the band's homonymous record, featuring renditions recorded by various artists and released in conjunction to the original album's 30th anniversary. The track also features Elton John on the piano, Yo-Yo Ma and Red Hot Chili Peppers' Chad Smith. The singer initially teased a Metallica cover album in October 2020 and had already performed the track live during her set at Glastonbury. To promote Plastic Hearts, Cyrus teased a concert tour around the album's release. The tour was postponed due to the pandemic but Cyrus was able to headline several music festivals in the country during summer 2021, including Austin City Limits, Lollapalooza, and Music Midtown. Later that year, she revealed she would tour South America for the first time in seven years in early 2022. The second special off her deal with NBCUniversal was Miley's New Year's Eve Party, which Cyrus co-hosted from Miami with Saturday Night Live cast member Pete Davidson and also co-executive produced under her production company Hopetown Entertainment, featuring performances by Cyrus, 24kGoldn, Anitta, Billie Joe Armstrong, Brandi Carlile, Jack Harlow, Kitty Cash, and Saweetie. In February 2022, Cyrus embarked on her music festival concert tour, Attention Tour, in support of Plastic Hearts, which took place in North, South, and Central America. This marked her first tour to South America since her Gypsy Heart Tour in 2011. The tour concluded on March 26, 2022. On April 1, 2022, Cyrus released her third live album, Attention: Miley Live. Most of the album was recorded during her concert as part of the Super Bowl Music Fest at the Crypto.com Arena in Los Angeles on February 12, 2022, with the set list including songs from her albums Plastic Hearts, Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz, Bangerz, The Time of Our Lives, Breakout, and Meet Miley Cyrus, along with multiple cover songs. The album also includes two unreleased tracks—"Attention" and "You". She said the album was "curated by the fans for the fans". Emily Swingle of Clash gave acclaim to Cyrus's versatile vocals, saying her "voice is truly a force to be reckoned with, seamlessly fitting whatever genre she chooses to tackle. From the playful, country-hip-hop banger that is '4x4', to rap-heavy '23', to the bluesy, rich cover of Janis Joplin's 'Maybe', it seems like Cyrus can fit into just about any genre she gets her paws on." By the end of that month, Cyrus released the deluxe version of the album, which includes six additional songs including a mashup of "Mother's Daughter" and "Boys Don't Cry" featuring Anitta, that are mostly part of her time at the Lollapalooza festival in Brazil and other shows in Latin America; she commented on the addition of her single "Angels Like You" at her concert in Colombia in gratitude due to the song reaching the number one spot on iTunes in that country and because her fans sang the song all night outside the hotel where she was staying in Bogotá. The following month, NBC announced that Miley's New Year's Eve Party had been renewed for a second iteration set to be aired on New Year's Eve 2022–23. In August 2022, it was announced that Cyrus is set to star in a Christmas television film Dolly Parton's Mountain Magic Christmas, produced by Dolly Parton for NBC. In December 2022, Morrissey announced that Cyrus wanted her backing vocals taken off from his upcoming record that was recorded two years earlier, but not yet released. In late 2022, Cyrus and her longtime collaborator Mike Will Made It teased new music to be released in 2023, on the latter's social media. Cyrus continued to tease a new musical era through a cryptic promotional campaign—which included posters in cities around the world, countdowns on her website, and video previews—with the caption, "New Year, New Miley". Days later, during the second edition of Miley's New Year's Eve Party, the singer's next lead single, "Flowers", was announced. It was released on January 13, 2023, accompanied by a music video directed by Jacob Bixenman. "Flowers" debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100, Global 200, and Global Excl. US charts; it spent thirteen weeks each atop the global charts. The song became the longest-running and the third longest-running leader on the charts, respectively. Topping the Hot 100 for eight non-consecutive weeks, it marked Cyrus's second and longest-running US number-one single, nearly a decade after "Wrecking Ball" (2013). "Flowers" became a global success and Cyrus's biggest hit, topping the charts in 37 countries, such as Australia, Canada, France, Germany, and the UK. It was the most-streamed and most-downloaded song across various platforms in numerous countries, and the most-consumed song on US radio; both in 2023. On Spotify, the single became the fastest track to surpass 100 million and 1 billion plays (7 and 112 days), at the time. With 38 weeks at the summit, it marked the longest-running chart-topper of all time of the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart. "Flowers" topped the year-end charts in various regions, and ranked as the second best-performing song of the year on the Billboard year-end Hot 100 chart of 2023. According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI), it was the best-selling song of 2023 globally. A demo version of the track followed on March 3, 2023. Cyrus's eighth studio album, Endless Summer Vacation, was released on March 10, 2023. She co-produced it with Kid Harpoon, Greg Kurstin, Mike Will Made It, and Tyler Johnson. Cyrus announced the album in January, with its artwork and a trailer. Her first studio effort with Columbia Records, she described the record as "[her] love letter to LA", which reflects upon the "strength [she] found in focusing on [her] physical and mental well-being". The album features collaborations with Brandi Carlile and Sia. Endless Summer Vacation debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 119,000 album-equivalent units. It marked Cyrus's tenth top-five and fourteenth top-ten entry on the chart. The second single of the album, "River", was released on March 13, 2023. It debuted at number 32 on the US Hot 100 and peaked at number two on the Hot Dance/Electronic Songs chart. "Jaded", which peaked at number 56, became the third single in April 2023; a music video for the song followed in May. A documentary concert special, under her Backyard Sessions series, titled Endless Summer Vacation (Backyard Sessions), premiered on Disney+ on March 10, accompanying the album's release. Executive produced by Cyrus, it features the singer perform songs from the album, and her 2009 single "The Climb", with an appearance by Rufus Wainwright. In June, she guest-voiced Van in the second season of the Netflix adult animated sitcom, Human Resources. An updated version of the Disney+ special, titled Endless Summer Vacation: Continued (Backyard Sessions), premiered on ABC on August 24, 2023. The day after, Cyrus released the standalone single "Used to Be Young", which was included in the digital reissue of Endless Summer Vacation. The track debuted at number eight in the US, marking her 12th top-ten single. A rock re-recording of Cyrus's 2013 single "Wrecking Ball" by Dolly Parton featuring the former as a guest vocalist was released on October 20, 2023, as the final single of Parton's album, Rockstar. Billboard ranked Cyrus as the third-best-selling female artist and ninth-best-selling musician of 2023. In February 2024, at the 66th Annual Grammy Awards, Cyrus received six nominations, including Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album for Endless Summer Vacation, and won Record of the Year and Best Pop Solo Performance for "Flowers"—her first set of wins. She appeared in a cameo role as Tiffany Plastercaster—inspired by Cynthia Plaster Caster—in the Ethan Coen-directed comedy road film Drive-Away Dolls, released later that month. Her first release of 2024 was as a feature on "Doctor (Work It Out)" by Pharrell Williams. The song is an outtake from her fourth album Bangerz (2013); it was leaked online in 2017 and was reworked and re-recorded before being released on March 1, 2024. Cyrus is one of 16 artists who will cover a Talking Heads song on the A24 tribute album Everyone's Getting Involved: A Tribute to Talking Heads' Stop Making Sense (2024).. Cyrus was also featured on Beyoncé's album Cowboy Carter, released on March 29, 2024, on the duet "II Most Wanted". In March 2024, to commemorate the 65th anniversary of International Women's Day, Cyrus was one of a number of celebrities who had their likeness turned into Bratz doll. Miley Cyrus has been described mainly as a pop singer who has also developed a rock style. Her music has also spanned many other different genres including teen pop, country, hip hop, and psychedelic. Cyrus has cited Elvis Presley as her biggest inspiration. She has also cited artists such as Madonna, Lana Del Rey, Dolly Parton, Timbaland, Whitney Houston, Christina Aguilera, Joan Jett, Lil Kim, Shania Twain, Hanson, OneRepublic, and Britney Spears as influences. Since the beginning of her music career, Cyrus has been described as being predominantly a pop artist. Her Hannah Montana 2: Meet Miley Cyrus debut studio effort was characterized as sounding similar to her releases as "Hannah Montana" featuring a pop-rock and bubblegum pop sound. Cyrus hoped that the release of Breakout (2008) would help distance her from this sound; the record featured Cyrus experimenting with various genres. Cyrus co-wrote eight songs for the album and was quoted as saying: "I just hope this record showcases that, more than anything, I'm a [song]writer." The songs on her early releases feature lyrics on the topics of love and relationships. Cyrus possesses a mezzo-soprano vocal range, although her vocals were once described as alto with a "Nashville twang" in both her spoken and singing voice. Her voice has a distinctive raspy sound to it, similar in vein to that of Pink and Amy Winehouse. On "Party in the U.S.A." (2009), her vocals feature belter refrains, while those on the song "Obsessed" (2009) are described as "husky". Releases such as "The Climb" (2009) and "These Four Walls" (2008) feature elements of country music and showcase Cyrus's "twangy vocals". Cyrus experimented with an electropop sound on "Fly on the Wall" (2008), a genre that she would explore further with the release of Can't Be Tamed (2010), her third studio album. It was initially intended to feature rock elements prior to its completion, and Cyrus claimed after its release that it could be her final pop album. The album's songs speak of Cyrus's desire to achieve freedom in both her personal and professional life. She began working on Bangerz (2013) during a musical hiatus, and described the record as having a "dirty south feel" prior to its release. Critics noted the use of hip hop and synthpop on the album. The album's songs are placed in chronological order telling the story of her failed relationship with Liam Hemsworth. Cyrus described Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz (2015) as "a little psychedelic, but still in that pop world". For her rock-influenced album, Plastic Hearts, Cyrus cited Britney Spears and Metallica as major influences. Inspired by pop and dance-pop, Endless Summer Vacation (2023) "feels like a recap of her career's 15-plus years, with Cyrus breezing through genres with the ease of a well-seasoned tourist." Cyrus related its overall concept to her affection for Los Angeles. Cyrus has become known for her controversial musical performances, including on her Bangerz Tour (2014) and Milky Milky Milk Tour (2015). Her performance of "Party in the U.S.A." at the 2009 Teen Choice Awards sparked a "national uproar" because of her outfit and perceived pole dancing. She faced similar controversy over her performance of "Can't Be Tamed" (2010) on Britain's Got Talent, where the singer pretended to kiss one of her female backup dancers onstage; she defended the performance, arguing that she did nothing wrong. Cyrus became the subject of media and public scrutiny following her performance of "We Can't Stop" (2013) and "Blurred Lines" (2013) with Robin Thicke at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards. Clad in a flesh-colored latex two-piece, she touched Thicke's crotch area with a giant foam finger and twerked against his crotch. The performance resulted in a media frenzy; one reviewer likened the performance to a "bad acid trip", while another described it as a "trainwreck in the classic sense of the word as the audience reaction seemed to be a mix of confusion, dismay and horror in a cocktail of embarrassment". Cyrus entered the stage of her Bangerz Tour by sliding down a slide in the shape of a tongue, and draw media attention during the tour for her unique outfits and racy performances. In the early years of her career, Cyrus had a generally wholesome image as a teen idol. Her fame increased dramatically in the wake of the Vanity Fair photo scandal in 2008, and it was reported that photographs of Cyrus could be sold to photo agencies for up to $2,000 per photo. In subsequent years, her image continued to shift dramatically from her teen idol status. In 2008, Donny Osmond wrote of Cyrus's imminent transition to adulthood: "Miley will have to face adulthood... As she does, she'll want to change her image, and that change will be met with adversity." The release of her 2010 album Can't Be Tamed saw Cyrus officially attempting to distance herself from her teenage persona by releasing controversial music videos for her songs "Can't Be Tamed" and "Who Owns My Heart". Her behavior throughout 2013 and 2014 sparked a substantial amount of controversy, although her godmother Dolly Parton said "...the girl can write. The girl can sing. The girl is smart. And she doesn't have to be so drastic. But I will respect her choices. I did it my way, so why can't she do it her way?" Cyrus was ranked #17 spot on Forbes' list of the most powerful celebrities in 2014; the magazine notes that "The last time she made our list was when she was still rolling in Hannah Montana money. Now the pop singer is all grown up and courting controversy at every turn." In August 2014, her life was documented in a comic book titled Fame: Miley Cyrus; it begins with her controversial 2013 MTV Video Music Awards performance and covers her Disney fame as well as exploring her childhood in Tennessee. The comic book was written by Michael L. Frizell, drawn by Juan Luis Rincón, and is available in both print and digital formats. In September 2010, Cyrus placed tenth on Billboard's first-ever list of Music's Hottest Minors of 2010; she was ranked twenty-first in 2011 and eighteenth in 2012. In 2013, Maxim listed Cyrus as number one on their annual Hot 100 list. Cyrus was chosen by Time magazine as one of the finalists for Person of the Year in November 2013; she came in third place with 16.3% of the staff vote. In March 2014, Skidmore College in New York began to offer a special topics sociology course entitled "The Sociology of Miley Cyrus: Race, Class, Gender and Media" which was "using Miley as a lens through which to explore sociological thinking about identity, entertainment, media and fame". In 2015, Cyrus was listed as one of the nine runners-up for The Advocate's Person of the Year. Cyrus currently resides in Hidden Hills, California and also owns a $5.8 million home in her hometown of Franklin. While Cyrus was raised as a Christian and identified herself as such during her childhood and early adult life, she includes references to Tibetan Buddhism in the lyrics to her song "Milky Milky Milk" (2015) and is also influenced by Hindu beliefs. Since 2019, she has been a vocally childfree person. Cyrus came out to her mother at age 14 and has said: "I never want to label myself! I am ready to love anyone that loves me for who I am! I am open." In June 2015, Time magazine reported she is gender fluid. She was quoted as stating she "doesn't relate to being boy or girl, and I don't have to have my partner relate to boy or girl." Cyrus stated she is "literally open to every single thing that is consenting and doesn't involve an animal and everyone is of age". Cyrus is a supporter of the LGBT community. Her song My Heart Beats for Love (2010) was written for one of Cyrus's gay friends, while she has since claimed London to be her favorite place to perform due to its extensive gay scene. Cyrus also has an equals sign tattooed on her ring finger in support of same-sex marriage. After her 2018 marriage to a man, Cyrus went on the record to state she still identified as queer. She founded the Happy Hippie Foundation in 2014, which works to "Fight injustice facing homeless youth, LGBTQ youth and other vulnerable populations". Cyrus became a vegan and stopped eating animal products in 2014. In September 2020, Cyrus revealed on The Joe Rogan Experience that she had to switch to a pescatarian diet after suffering from omega-3 deficiency, saying "I've been a vegan for a very long time and I had to introduce fish and omegas into my life because my brain wasn't functioning properly." Cyrus further revealed that she cried when eating her first fish after her vegan diet, saying "I cried for the fish ... it really hurts me to eat fish." Her decision to quit being vegan sparked backlash from people in the vegan and vegetarian community, who accused Cyrus of "abandoning her vegan diet". Cyrus has been open about her recreational use of cannabis. She told Rolling Stone in 2013 that it was "the best drug on earth" and called it, along with MDMA, a "happy drug". While accepting the Best Video Award at the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards, Cyrus appeared to smoke a joint onstage; this was removed from the delayed broadcast of the show in the United States. In a 2014 interview with W magazine, Cyrus stated "I love weed" and "I just love getting stoned." In a 2017 interview on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, Cyrus said that she had quit cannabis before the press tour for her Younger Now album so she could be "super clear" when discussing the record. During a 2018 interview with Andy Cohen, she credited her mother for reintroducing her to cannabis. In 2019, Cyrus sent "Nothing Breaks Like a Heart" collaborator Mark Ronson a cannabis bouquet from Lowell Herb Co as a tongue-in-cheek Valentine's Day gift. She invested in the cannabis company in August. Before and shortly after vocal cord surgery in November 2019, Cyrus stated that she had stayed sober from the use of cannabis and alcohol. Cyrus has said that she dated singer-actor Nick Jonas from June 2006 to December 2007, claiming they were "in love" and began dating soon after they first met. Their relationship attracted considerable media attention. Cyrus was in a nine-month relationship with model Justin Gaston from 2008 to 2009. While filming The Last Song, Cyrus began an on-again, off-again relationship with her co-star Liam Hemsworth in 2009. During the breakups, Cyrus was romantically linked to actors Lucas Till (2009) and Josh Bowman (2011). Cyrus and Hemsworth were first engaged from May 2012 until September 2013. She has also dated actor Patrick Schwarzenegger (2014–2015) and model Stella Maxwell (2015). Cyrus and Hemsworth rekindled their relationship in March 2016, and became re-engaged that October. In November 2018, Cyrus and Hemsworth's home burned down in the Woolsey Fire in California. On December 23, Cyrus and Hemsworth married in a private wedding ceremony in their home in Nashville. She felt that her marriage "[redefined] what it looks like for someone that's a queer person like [herself] to be in a hetero relationship" though she was "still very sexually attracted to women". Cyrus indicated that the ceremony was "kind of out of character for [her]" because "[they have] worn rings forever [and] definitely didn't need it in any way". She believed the loss of their home to be the catalyst for getting married, citing that "the timing felt right" and that "no one is promised the next day, or the next, so [she tries] to be 'in the now' as much as possible". On August 10, 2019, Cyrus announced their separation; eleven days later, Hemsworth filed for divorce, citing "irreconcilable differences", and their divorce was finalized on January 28, 2020. After announcing her separation from Hemsworth, she dated Kaitlynn Carter from August to September 2019. In October 2019, Cyrus began dating Australian singer Cody Simpson, a longtime friend. In August 2020, Cyrus announced that she and Simpson had split up. Her announcement coincided with the release of her single "Midnight Sky", which was inspired by her breakups with Hemsworth, Carter, and Simpson. Throughout her career Cyrus has sung on several charity singles such as: Just Stand Up!, Send It On, Everybody Hurts and We Are the World 25 for Haiti. She is an avid supporter of the City of Hope National Medical Center in California, having attended benefit concerts in 2008, 2009 and 2012. In 2008 and 2009, during her Best of Both Worlds and Wonder World Tours, for every concert ticket sold, she donated one dollar to the organization. Cyrus celebrated her 16th birthday at Disneyland by delivering a US$1 million donation from Disney to Youth Service America. In July 2009, Cyrus performed at the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation's 20th annual Time for Heroes celebrity picnic and donated several items including autographed merchandise, and a script from Hannah Montana for the Ronald McDonald House Auction. Cyrus has supported charities including the Elton John AIDS Foundation, Entertainment Industry Foundation, Habitat for Humanity, United Service Organizations, Youth Service America and Music for Relief. In January 2010, Cyrus posted the final video to her mileymandy YouTube Account. In the video, Cyrus promoted support for To Write Love on Her Arms, and he next day appeared in a promotional video for the film with Joaquin Phoenix, and Liv Tyler. In February 2010, she donated several items, including the dress she wore to the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards, and two tickets to the Hollywood premiere of her film The Last Song, to raise money for the victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake. In April 2010, Cyrus, working with the Make-A-Wish Foundation, performed for and met with 29 children at The Grove at Farmers Market in Los Angeles, California. Cyrus continued to support The Make-A-Wish Foundation, and met with at least 150 children. In January 2011, Cyrus met an ailing fan with spina bifida with the charity Kids Wish Network. In April 2011, she appeared in a commercial for the American Red Cross asking people to pledge $10 to help those affected by the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami. That same year, Hilary Duff presented Cyrus with the first-ever Global Action Youth Leadership Award at the first Annual Global Action Awards Gala for her support of Blessings in a Backpack, an organization that works to feed hungry children in schools, and her personal Get Ur Good On campaign with the Youth Services of America. Cyrus stated: "I want (kids) to do something they love. Not something that seems like a chore because someone tells them that's the right thing to do or what their parents want or what's important to people around them, but what's in their heart." In December 2011, she appeared in a commercial for the charity J/P Haitian Relief Organization, and teamed up with her elder brother Trace Cyrus to design a limited-edition T-shirt and hoodie for charity. All proceeds from the sale of these items went to her charity, Get Ur Good On, which supports education for under-privileged children. That month, she performed "The Climb" at the CNN Heroes: An All-Star Tribute at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles. In 2012, Cyrus released a cover version of Bob Dylan's You're Gonna Make Me Lonesome When You Go with Johnzo West for the charity Amnesty International as a part of the album Chimes of Freedom. She also appeared in a commercial for the Rock the Vote campaign, which encouraged young people to make their voices heard by voting in the 2012 federal election. For her 20th birthday, activists at People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) adopted a pig called Nora in her name. Cyrus also supports 39 well-known charities, including Make-a-Wish Foundation, Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, St. Jude's Children's Research Hospital, To Write Love on Her Arms, NOH8 Campaign, Love Is Louder Than the Pressure to Be Perfect and The Jed Foundation. In 2013, Cyrus was named the fourteenth-most-charitable celebrity of the year by Do Something. She also appeared with Justin Bieber and Pitbull in a television special entitled The Real Change Project: Artists for Education. On August 28, 2014, Miley appeared alongside Justin Timberlake at an HIV/AIDS charity event in the White House. At the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards, Cyrus won Video of the Year for her song Wrecking Ball. Instead of accepting the award herself, she invited a 22-year-old homeless man by the name of Jesse to collect it on her behalf; she had met him at My Friend's Place, an organization that helps homeless youth find shelter, work, health care, and education. His acceptance speech urged musicians to learn more about youth homelessness in Los Angeles through Cyrus's Facebook page. Cyrus then launched a Prizeo campaign to raise funds for the charity; those who made donations were entered into a sweepstake for a chance to meet Cyrus on her Bangerz Tour in Rio de Janeiro that September. In early 2015, Cyrus teamed up with MAC Cosmetics to launch her own branded Viva Glam lipstick, with proceeds to the Mac AIDS Fund. In June 2017, Cyrus performed at One Love Manchester, a televised benefit concert organized by Ariana Grande following the Manchester Arena bombing on her concert two weeks earlier. During an appearance on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in August 2017, Cyrus said that she would donate $500,000 to Hurricane Harvey relief efforts. In August 2019, she performed at the Sunny Hill Festival in Kosovo, a festival to raise funds to help people with financial difficulties there, created by Dua Lipa and her father. In September 2019, Cyrus met with another fan through the Make-A-Wish Foundation at the 2019 iHeartRadio Music Festival in Las Vegas, Nevada. Cyrus and her boyfriend Cody Simpson donated 120 tacos to healthcare workers amid the COVID-19 pandemic in April 2020. That same month, she partnered again with MAC Cosmetics's annual Viva Glam campaign to donate $10 million toward 250 local organizations nationwide heavily impacted by the pandemic. Cyrus showed support for the Black Lives Matter movement by sharing links and resources on social media, donning a Black Lives Matter face mask, and attending protests following the murder of George Floyd. Cyrus is the founder of the Happy Hippie Foundation, which works to "fight injustice facing homeless youth, LGBTQ youth, and other vulnerable populations". From 2014 to 2016 the foundation served nearly 1,500 homeless youth in Los Angeles, reached more than 25,000 LGBTQ youth and their families with resources about gender, and provided social services to transgender individuals, youth in conflict zones, and people affected by crises. Happy Hippie encourages Cyrus's fans to support causes including gender equality, LGBTQ rights and mental health through awareness campaigns and fundraising. Leading up to the 2020 presidential election, Happy Hippie encouraged its Instagram followers to seek out VoteRiders for assistance ensuring that gender identity would not affect their right to vote. On June 15, 2015, Cyrus launched the campaign #InstaPride in collaboration with Instagram. The campaign features a series of portraits starring transgender and gender-expansive people, which were posted to her Instagram feed with the hashtags "#HappyHippiePresents" and "#InstaPride". It stated that it was aimed at encouraging diversity and tolerance by showing these people in a positive light as examples for others who might be struggling to figure themselves out, and as a reference point for people who didn't know personally anyone in that situation. Cyrus was behind the camera for the entire photoshoot, and interviewed her 14 subjects to share their personal stories. She said she wanted to bring attention to and celebrate people who would not normally find themselves being the stars of a photoshoot or portrayed on the cover of a magazine. Following the loss of Miley and Hemsworth's Malibu home from the Woolsey Fire, the community and they launched the Malibu Foundation for relief efforts following the 2018 California wildfires, Miley's Happy Hippie Foundation donating $500,000 to the Malibu Foundation. Cyrus's early success as the face of Disney Channel's billion-dollar franchise Hannah Montana played an important role as shaping the 2000s teen pop culture earning her the honorific nickname of "Teen Queen". Bickford stated Hannah Montana adopted a business model of combining celebrity acts with film, television, and popular music for a pre-adolescent audience. He called the series "genre-defining" and likened this model to 1990s teen pop artists such as Britney Spears and NSYNC, who were also marketed to children. Morgan Genevieve Blue of Feminist Media Studies stated the series' primary female characters, Miley and her alter ego Hannah, are positioned as post-feminist subjects in a way their representation is confined to notions of femininity and consumerism. The Times journalist Craig McLean named Cyrus the "world's biggest-ever teenage star". During the Best of Both Worlds Tour, tickets were sold out in minutes and stadiums were completely filled making it the highest-grossing concert tour for a new act in 2007 and 2008. According to Billboard boxscore, the Best of Both Worlds Tour had a total attendance of approximately one million people and grossed over US$54 million, earning Cyrus the award for Breakthrough Act at the 2008 Billboard Touring Awards. In 2012, Rolling Stone ranked Cyrus as one of the top 25 teen idol breakout moments of the rock era, which Andy Greene wrote: "Miley's rise was meteoric. Tickets to her 2007 Best of Both Worlds tour sold out faster than any tour in memory ... It seemed like she was poised to become a more stable version of Britney Spears – especially after singles 'The Climb' and 'Party In The USA'". Due to her popularity, Paul McCartney compared their success to that of the Beatles in an interview during his tour in 2011. In this regard, he commented: "I think when they have new sensations, like Miley Cyrus or Justin Bieber, teenagers identify with them, in the same way that the boys identified with The Beatles, [...] when you have thousands of teenagers feeling the same, they become elated because they have this love for something in common, whether it is The Beatles, Miley Cyrus, Justin Bieber, or whatever." Over the years, Cyrus's song "Party in the U.S.A." gained popularity in American culture on holidays and historic events. The song has re-entered the charts every Independence Day since its release. Following the death of Osama bin Laden on May 2, 2011, a resurgence in popularity of the music video occurred. The official YouTube video was flooded with comments regarding the death of bin Laden and it was immediately deemed a celebratory anthem for the event. In 2013, an online petition on the White House's "We the People" petitions website was urging then-president Barack Obama to change the U.S. national anthem from "The Star-Spangled Banner" to "Party in the U.S.A." Following the 2020 presidential election, as major news outlets announced Democratic nominee Joe Biden the winner of the presidential race, on November 7, 2020, supporters in New York City started singing "Party in the U.S.A." at Times Square. Cyrus's album Bangerz (2013), along with its promotional events, is considered to be one of the most controversial moments in the 2010s wider popular culture and established Cyrus among the decade's most controversial figures. Glamour writer Mickey Woods likened the promotional "era" for the album to those of Britney Spears's and Christina Aguilera's third and fourth studio albums Britney (2001) and Stripped (2002), respectively, adding that Cyrus's record "will probably be retrospectively deemed iconic, maybe even classic". Billboard listed Bangerz as one of the best and most influential albums of the 2010s noting that "with this pivotal album release, Cyrus took control of her public persona, surprising less with her provocative antics than with her constant artistic evolution". The album is considered a trendsetter in "weaving together urban and pop influences, what's most revered now is what it represented then" according to Lyndsey Havens. Patrick Ryan of USA Today commented that Cyrus's collaborations with Mike Will Made It on the album contributed to his new-found prominence, stating that Mike Will Made It's position as an executive producer has helped him "[jump] to the forefront as an interesting character [...] in an era where a lot of producers have fallen behind the scenes again". Vice described Cyrus as "the most punk rock musician out there right now" and that she is "spinning circles around every single pop star who is trying to be edgy right now". MTV named Cyrus their Best Artist of 2013, and James Montgomery of MTV News elaborated on the network's decision that Cyrus "[declared] her independence and [dominated] the pop-culture landscape", adding that "she schooled—and shocked—us all in 2013, and did so on her own terms." Billboard staff called Cyrus the "Most Talked About Pop Star" of 2013, and also recognized the controversial evolution of her career as the "Top Music Moment" of the year, elaborating that she was a "maelstrom that expanded and grazed nearly every aspect of pop culture in 2013."; the publication also listed "We Can't Stop" as best song of 2013 for being "one of the bolder musical choices in recent memory, and that risk paid off tremendously." and one of the songs that defined the decade stating it "created a new play in the playbook" of pop music. In 2015, Rebecca Nicholson from The Guardian published an article calling Cyrus the Madonna of her generation, saying that "she's a Disney survivor with a fluid approach to gender identity. And, like the old three-chord punks, she gives really good quote". According to Nicholson, Cyrus takes "the 90s Madonna approach to public sexuality: it's deliberately provocative, and crucially, it is not being served up for male consumption." Likewise, she defends Cyrus's controversial rebellion, highlighting that behind the character there is a human, talented and strong person who manages to connect with the public, just like the "Queen of Pop". In November of the same year, Billboard cataloged the singer as one of the Greatest of All Time Billboard 200 Artists, occupying position thirty-one. In 2017, the aforementioned magazine also published an article naming the singer a "Queer Superhero" for her philanthropic fight for the LGBTQ+ community. Cyrus has also inspired multiple artists including Lil Nas X, Troye Sivan and Lea Michelle. Meet Miley Cyrus (2007) Breakout (2008) Can't Be Tamed (2010) Bangerz (2013) Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz (2015) Younger Now (2017) Plastic Hearts (2020) Endless Summer Vacation (2023) Big Fish (2003) Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus: Best of Both Worlds Concert (2008) Bolt (2008) Hannah Montana: The Movie (2009) The Last Song (2010) LOL (2012) So Undercover (2012) Miley: The Movement (2013) Miley Cyrus: Tongue Tied (2014) Miley Cyrus: Bangerz Tour (2014) The Night Before (2015) A Very Murray Christmas (2015) Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 (2017) MTV Unplugged Presents: Miley Cyrus Backyard Sessions (2020) Stand By You (2021) Endless Summer Vacation (Backyard Sessions) (2023) Drive-Away Dolls (2024) Headlining Best of Both Worlds Tour (2007–2008) Wonder World Tour (2009) Gypsy Heart Tour (2011) Bangerz Tour (2014) Promotional Milky Milky Milk Tour (2015) Attention Tour (2022) Opening act The Cheetah Girls – The Party's Just Begun Tour (2006–2007) United States portal Biography portal Pop music portal Honorific nicknames in popular music List of awards and nominations received by Miley Cyrus List of Billboard Social 50 number-one artists List of most-followed Instagram accounts While married to Liam Hemsworth (2018–2020) For her discography as Hannah Montana, see Hannah Montana discography. Mandell, Andrea (February 8, 2019). "Yep, Miley Cyrus took Liam Hemsworth's last name. But will she use it professionally?". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 1, 2019. Retrieved February 8, 2019. * Levine, Nick (March 10, 2023). "Why Miley Cyrus is the ultimate 21st-Century pop star". BBC Culture. Archived from the original on March 10, 2023. Retrieved March 10, 2023. Sheffield, Rob (March 8, 2023). "Miley's Whole Career Has Been Building to This Moment". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 10, 2023. Chang, Rachel (November 3, 2020). "Hannah Montana to rock goddess: Miley Cyrus is queen of genres". The Daily Targum. Archived from the original on July 25, 2021. Retrieved March 10, 2022. Cliff, Aimee (May 31, 2019). "Miley Cyrus: She Is Coming review – pop chameleon finds her true colours". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 25, 2022. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Roberts, Kayleigh (July 6, 2019). "Miley Cyrus Fooled Britney Spears' Blood Relatives With This 'Oops!...I Did It Again' Costume". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on September 22, 2022. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Dhindsa, Jasleen (September 12, 2022). "Noah Cyrus and the Delicate Art of Vulnerability | Interview". The Line of Best Fit. Archived from the original on September 22, 2022. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Henderson, Taylor (August 5, 2020). "Miley Cyrus Teases New Era of Music ... With Dua Lipa". Pride.com. Archived from the original on September 22, 2022. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Kitchener, Shaun (November 7, 2011). "Miley Cyrus Is Dracula's Daughter". Entertainmentwise. Archived from the original on June 19, 2013. Retrieved May 8, 2013. Teen queen Miley Cyrus has signed up to play Dracula's daughter in new movie Hotel Transylvania. "Miley Cyrus: Teen Queen". Parade. Retrieved May 8, 2013. "From Teen Queen to Leading Lady: Miley Cyrus' Sizzlin' Style Through the Years!". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on June 10, 2013. Retrieved May 8, 2013. * Crucchiola, Jordan; Haylock, Zoe; Polk, Milan (June 14, 2019). "Disney and Nickelodeon Stars Gone Pop: A Ranking". Vulture. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved October 25, 2019. "Gold & Platinum – Top Artists (Digital Singles)". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved February 6, 2024. "Billboard's Top Artists of the 2010s". Billboard. October 31, 2019. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved February 6, 2024. "Miley Cyrus Biography". The Biography Channel. Archived from the original on May 12, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2014. "Miley Cyrus Opens Up About Heart Condition". mtv.com. MTV. Archived from the original on March 4, 2017. Retrieved March 4, 2017. Hiltbrand, David (May 20, 2006). "Miley Cyrus braced for Disney stardom". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Platinum Equity. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved May 30, 2010. France, Lisa Respers (August 25, 2009). "'Eraserhead' director inspired Billy Ray Cyrus". CNN. Archived from the original on March 4, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2013. Geller, Wendy (January 18, 2013). "Dolly Parton Has A Surprising Family Role–That You Just May Not Know About!". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved April 7, 2014. "Once a Country Superstar, He Got Out of the Spotlight for Fatherhood". ABC News. The Walt Disney Company. March 13, 2004. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved August 14, 2008. Heath, Chris (March 2011). "Mr. Hannah Montana's Achy Broken Heart". GQ. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved September 10, 2017. "Miley Cyrus' Brother Hospitalized With Serious Bleeding". The Hollywood Reporter. July 15, 2012. Archived from the original on June 8, 2014. Retrieved April 7, 2014. Tan, Michelle (July 2, 2007). "My Girl". People. Archived from the original on December 19, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2019. "Instagram". www.instagram.com. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Graff, Gary (June 19, 2009). "Metro Station Ready To Roll With Miley". Billboard. Detroit, Michigan. Archived from the original on April 23, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2009. "Noah Cyrus Announces 'Good Cry' EP Release Date". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 5, 2018. Retrieved January 12, 2019. Spanos, Brittany (July 9, 2018). "Noah Cyrus Announces 'The Good Cry' Tour". Rollingstone.com. Archived from the original on February 21, 2023. Retrieved January 12, 2019. "See Miley Cyrus' Brother Braison Make His Modeling Debut". E! Online. November 25, 2013. Archived from the original on July 23, 2014. Retrieved April 7, 2014. "Braison Cyrus on Instagram". Instagram.com. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved January 12, 2019. "Braison Cyrus Gets Engaged, Releases Debut Single "I'll Never Leave You"". Music Mayhem Magazine. December 8, 2018. Archived from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved October 8, 2019. Fisher, Luchina (November 25, 2013). "5 Things About Miley Cyrus' Sister Brandi". ABC News. Archived from the original on April 11, 2014. Retrieved April 7, 2014. Vena, Jocelyn (April 3, 2009). "Cyrus And Jonas Siblings Team Up For Miyazaki Movie". MTV Movies Blog. Archived from the original on September 7, 2015. Retrieved April 4, 2009. Cyrus, Miley (September 2017). "Chillin' at Miley's House". Cosmopolitan. 263 (3): 140. "WCS Teacher Surprises Hannah Montana". Williamson County Schools. Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Cyrus, Miley (July 2007). "Miley Cyrus". PBS Kids (Interview). Steinberg, Jacques (April 20, 2006). "Hannah Montana and Miley Cyrus: A Tale of Two Tweens". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 2, 2020. Retrieved June 9, 2010. Sessums, Kevin (March 21, 2010). "Miley Cyrus: 'I Know Who I Am Now'". Parade. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2011. "Miley Cyrus Wants to Do 'Cleaner' 'Sex and the City'". Fox News Channel. 21st Century Fox. July 16, 2008. Archived from the original on January 8, 2014. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Cyrus, Miley. "Miley Cyrus aka Hannah Montana Interview". Tribute (Interview). Interviewed by Bonnie Laufer. Archived from the original on January 23, 2010. Retrieved June 1, 2010. Ouzounian, Richard (April 4, 2009). "Miley Cyrus: Teen of all media". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on February 21, 2023. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Weisz, Marni (March 1, 2009). "Famous Teens: Miley Cyrus". Cineplex Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 21, 2011. Retrieved April 13, 2009. Hiscock, John (March 25, 2010). "Miley Cyrus interview: I'm going to hire an acting coach". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2010. "Interview with Miley Cyrus". B96. Archived from the original on July 24, 2012. Retrieved March 21, 2011. Alleyne, Allyssia. "Inside Miley Cyrus' exuberant Los Angeles home -- designed by her mother". CNN. Archived from the original on May 3, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2021. Swertlow, Frank (October 26, 2009). "Showbiz Kids". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved June 1, 2010. McNamara, Tara (October 4, 2007). "Director of youth at Cunningham eyes multitalents". Variety. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Kit, Borys (May 4, 2008). "Miley Cyrus' agent moves to UTA". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Cyrus, Miley (2009). Miles to Go. Disney Hyperion. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-4231-1992-0. Oldenburg, Ann (March 23, 2006). "Lifelong work pays off, says Miley Cyrus, 13". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 28, 2023. Retrieved October 1, 2006. Cyrus, Miley; Cyrus, Tish; Cyrus, Billy Ray; Patterson, Lesley; Tan, Michelle (April 8, 2009). "Miley Cyrus". E! Special. E!. "Miley Cyrus Biography". TV Guide. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Ostrow, Joanne (October 25, 2007). "Disney marketers making most of 'Hannah Montana'". The Dallas Morning News. Archived from the original on January 16, 2008. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Poniewozik, James (October 18, 2007). "Hurricane Hannah". Time. Archived from the original on February 21, 2023. Retrieved May 5, 2010. McDowell, Jeanne (November 30, 2006). "A Disney Star Is Born". Time. Archived from the original on October 25, 2020. Retrieved April 5, 2014. Phares, Heather. "Hannah Montana - Hannah Montana". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on January 10, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2014. LaPorte, Nicole (June 17, 2010). "Have the Jonas Brothers Been Eclipsed by Justin Bieber?". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on January 5, 2017. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "Miley Cyrus – Spotlight". Defy Media LLC. Archived from the original on August 4, 2018. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "iTunes – Music – Hannah Montana 2 – Meet Miley Cyrus by Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus". iTunes. June 26, 2007. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "Cyrus Sidesteps Clarkson To Debut at No. 1". Billboard. July 4, 2007. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "See You Again". Amazon.co.uk. August 21, 2008. Archived from the original on September 12, 2019. Retrieved July 31, 2016. Grein, Paul (August 28, 2013). "Week Ending Aug. 25, 2013. Songs: Robin & Marvin". Chart Watch. Archived from the original on December 22, 2014. Gilbert, Calvin (September 5, 2007). "Billy Ray Cyrus Returns With New CD and Tour". CMT News. Archived from the original on October 11, 2008. Retrieved October 30, 2009. "Miley Cyrus is hottest concert ticket going". Today. October 8, 2007. Archived from the original on October 5, 2015. Retrieved May 2, 2014. "Miley Cyrus Launches 54-Date 'Best Of Both Worlds Tour' On October 18" (Press release). Hollywood Records. August 8, 2007. Archived from the original on February 22, 2008. Retrieved January 16, 2011. Boucher, Geoff; Lee, Chris (October 6, 2007). "'Hannah Montana' stirs a U.S. tizzy". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 19, 2010. Retrieved October 7, 2007. "Hannah Montana/Miley Cyrus: Best of Both Worlds Concert Tour (2008)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved August 7, 2011. Bowles, Scott (February 3, 2008). "Hannah Montana concert film earns extended theater stay". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved February 3, 2008. "Miley and Mandy Take It to YouTube". ExtraTV. February 27, 2008. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2014. Zetter, Kim (February 23, 2009). "Miley Cyrus Hacker Raided by FBI". Wired. Archived from the original on December 17, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2010. "Hacker Who Posted Racy Miley Cyrus Pics Busted". Fox News Channel. 21st Century Fox. October 22, 2008. Archived from the original on January 9, 2014. Retrieved May 29, 2010. "Miley Cyrus topless controversy". News. April 28, 2008. Archived from the original on May 1, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2008. Barnes, Brook (April 28, 2008). "A Topless Photo Threatens a Major Disney Franchise". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved April 29, 2008. Harding, Cortney (June 27, 2008). "Miley Cyrus grows up on 'Breakout'". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 7, 2013. Retrieved June 27, 2008. Caulfield, Keith; Hasty, Katie (July 31, 2008). "Miley Trumps Sugarland to Lead Billboard 200". Billboard. Retrieved February 14, 2010. Serjeant, Jill (July 21, 2008). "Miley Cyrus grows up and away from Hannah Montana". Thomson Reuters. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved July 21, 2008. Vena, Jocelyn (January 5, 2009). "Miley Cyrus' Golden Globe Nomination Caps A Busy Year For 'Hannah Montana' Star". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on March 27, 2022. Retrieved April 7, 2014. "Bolt Movie Reviews, Pictures". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved November 23, 2008. Paxman, Bob (September 14, 2009). "Climb Every Mountain". Country Weekly. 16 (31). ISSN 1074-3235. Grein, Paul (January 8, 2013). "Chart Watch: Pitbull & Kesha & Eminem & RiRi". Yahoo Music. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved June 26, 2016. "SNL Roars into March with Host Miley Cyrus and Musical Guest the Strokes on March 5". NBCUniversal. February 28, 2011. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved April 4, 2011. "What's Hannah Montana doing in the American Idol sales report?". USA Today. July 15, 2009. Archived from the original on November 29, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "Miley Cyrus Talks Walmart Clothing Line, Gears Up For Fall Tour". Access Online. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved October 2, 2019. "iTunes – Music – The Time of Our Lives by Miley Cyrus". iTunes. August 31, 2009. Archived from the original on October 11, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "Miley Cyrus Says She Has No Plans to Retire 'Hannah Montana' Character – Yet". Fox News Channel. Associated Press. September 24, 2009. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2010. Ben-Yehuda, Ayala; Caulfield, Keith; Pietroluongo, Silvio (August 20, 2009). "Miley Cyrus Catapults to No. 2 Debut on Billboard Hot 100 with 'Party in the USA;' Tied for Highest Debut of the Year". Billboard (Press release). Archived from the original on June 6, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2009. Lawrence, Jesse (January 24, 2014). "Miley Cyrus Bangerz Tour Could Learn A Thing Or Two From Lady Gaga's ArtPop Tour". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 29, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2017. "Entertainment | Kay to present Royal Variety show". BBC News. October 22, 2009. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2010. "Taylor Swift, Kanye West Named Top Female and Male Artists of 2009". Billboard. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on April 8, 2019. Retrieved March 8, 2010. Fleming, Michael (September 16, 2008). "Miley Cyrus to star in Disney film". Variety. Archived from the original on April 5, 2010. Retrieved June 18, 2009. "Last Song, the reviews at Metacritic.com". Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 21, 2010. Retrieved June 4, 2010. "The Last Song (2010)-Box Office Mojo". Archived from the original on April 4, 2010. Retrieved May 27, 2010. Bible, Karie (May 12, 2010). "Box Office Obits". Exhibitor Relations Co. Inc. Archived from the original on May 21, 2010. Retrieved June 4, 2010. "iTunes – Music – Can't Be Tamed by Miley Cyrus". iTunes. June 21, 2010. Archived from the original on January 17, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "Miley Cyrus 'Can't Be Tamed' VIDEO: Too Sexy Or Age Appropriate? (PHOTOS)". Huffington Post. July 4, 2010. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "Is Miley Cyrus' new video 'Can't Be Tamed' too racy?". Theindian.com. Archived from the original on August 15, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "Miley Cyrus' 'Can't Be Tamed' video: Has our little tween star flown the coop?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 7, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "Miley's sexy new video is anything but 'Tame'". New York Daily News. May 5, 2010. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016. Cortez, Lauren (March 6, 2013). "Miley Cyrus Breaks Up from Twitter and Signs with Britney Spears Manager; Can Larry Rudolph Orchestrate Another Comeback? : News". Mstarz. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "What is salvia? Miley Cyrus caught smoking plant". New York Daily News. December 10, 2010. Archived from the original on April 11, 2023. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "Miley Cyrus Opens Up About Salvia Bong Hit". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016. Melas, Chloe (February 9, 2011). "Miley Cyrus Admits To Smoking Salvia: It Was A Huge Mistake!". Hollywoodlife.com. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "#13 Miley Cyrus". Forbes. June 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2010. Retrieved April 5, 2014. "Miley Cyrus Back to Music". Cambio. February 14, 2011. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved August 7, 2011. Allin, Olivia (April 15, 2011). "Miley Cyrus won't tour in U.S., says foreign fans show the 'most love'". On the Red Carpet. Archived from the original on July 11, 2011. Retrieved April 7, 2014. Gallo, Lee-Maree (March 30, 2011). "Can't be Tamed singer to hit Perth shores". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on April 7, 2011. Retrieved April 16, 2011. "Miley Cyrus Signs With RCA, Will Work With Dr. Luke on New LP". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "Miley Cyrus ready to sing a new tune". Pasadena Star-News. March 28, 2010. Archived from the original on March 30, 2010. Retrieved April 3, 2010. "Miley Cyrus: Nothing I do is for shock value". CNN. May 25, 2010. Archived from the original on May 27, 2010. Retrieved May 27, 2010. "Miley Cyrus opts out of college". The Washington Post. May 25, 2010. Archived from the original on October 24, 2011. Retrieved May 27, 2010. McGee, Ryan (March 6, 2011). "Recap: Saturday Night Live – Miley Cyrus and The Strokes". Hitfix. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2013. Tucker, Ken (March 6, 2011). "'Saturday Night Live' review: Miley Cyrus and a show better than 'pretty cool': It was pretty funny". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 25, 2019. Retrieved October 2, 2019. Vary, Adam B. "Miley Cyrus joins 'Hotel Transylvania'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2011. Kitchener, Shaun (February 10, 2012). "Miley Cyrus Drops Out Of Film Role To Make Pop Comeback". Entertainmentwise. Gigwise. Archived from the original on April 4, 2015. Retrieved September 21, 2013. Russian, Ale (August 22, 2019). "Miley Cyrus Says She Was 'Kicked Off' Hotel Transylvania After Licking Liam Hemsworth's Penis Cake". People. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved October 28, 2020. Kaufman, Gil (February 8, 2012). "'Punk'd' Taps Justin Bieber, Miley Cyrus For Comeback — Music, Celebrity, Artist News". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Retrieved February 13, 2012. "How Did Khloé Kardashian Odom Get Punk'd by Miley Cyrus? (Hint: It's Pretty Gross)". E! Online. January 3, 2012. Archived from the original on February 21, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2012. Gomez, Luis (April 11, 2012). "Trailer for Chicago-based 'LOL' features Miley Cyrus, Edwardo's Pizza sign". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on December 28, 2013. Retrieved December 27, 2013. Fritz, Ben; Kaufman, Amy (April 18, 2012). "OMG! Miley Cyrus' 'LOL' gets no love from Lionsgate". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved March 2, 2013. Fritz, Ben; Kaufman, Amy (May 7, 2012). "Miley Cyrus' 'LOL' is a box office flop – but how big a flop?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 23, 2014. Retrieved December 27, 2013. "LOL". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on June 23, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2013. Heritage, Stuart (November 8, 2012). "So Undercover – the mystery of Miley Cyrus's film career". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 21, 2023. Retrieved May 2, 2014. Lansky, Sam (December 27, 2012). "Miley Cyrus Covers "Jolene" In Stunning 'Backyard Sessions' Video: Watch |". Idolator. Retrieved April 29, 2013. Chester, Jason (June 14, 2013). "'I Want To Erase My Past': Miley Cyrus Admits She's 'Embarrassed' By Hannah Montana". Entertainmentwise. Gigwise. Archived from the original on December 26, 2014. Retrieved September 26, 2013. "Miley Cyrus - Morning Sun (Prod. Diplo, Tiesto & Rock Mafia)". SoundCloud. Archived from the original on February 21, 2023. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "Rock Mafia Recruits Miley Cyrus For 'The Big Bang' Video". Billboard. November 2, 2010. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved April 8, 2014. Baltin, Steve (August 23, 2012). "Borgore on His Secret Dubstep Track With Miley Cyrus: 'She Likes Surprises'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 31, 2014. Retrieved January 18, 2014. Allin, Olivia (November 1, 2012). "Miley Cyrus, Liam Hemsworth 'make out' in Borgore music video - Watch". On the Red Carpet. Archived from the original on February 26, 2014. Retrieved January 18, 2014. "Two and a Half Men Returning for 11th Season, Fate of Angus T Jones To Be Determined". KpopStarz. April 25, 2013. Archived from the original on October 17, 2021. Retrieved April 29, 2013. Nessif, Bruna (August 12, 2012). "Miley Cyrus Chops Off Her Hair—Do You Like?". E! Online. Archived from the original on April 11, 2023. Retrieved August 31, 2013. Stevenson, Jane (July 16, 2013). "Miley Cyrus busy making music, having fun". Toronto Sun. Archived from the original on May 13, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2013. McKay, Hollie (September 11, 2013). "Is Miley Cyrus' manager behind her sexed up transformation?". Fox News. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved April 7, 2014. "MAVERICK IS A LEGEND OF COUNTRY TRAP". Hits Daily Double. May 3, 2019. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved January 8, 2020. Lipshutz, Jason (August 15, 2013). "Miley Cyrus Reveals 'Bangerz' Release Date". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 27, 2013. Retrieved September 1, 2013. Escudero, Nicki (October 14, 2013). "5 Reasons Why Miley Cyrus Is Good for Hip-Hop". Phoenix New Times. Archived from the original on October 28, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2013. Blistein, Jon (April 4, 2013). "Snoop Lion's 'Ashtrays and Heartbreaks' Features Miley Cyrus". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 23, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2017. Nelmes, Amy (April 2013). "Exclusive interview: Will.i.am believes Miley Cyrus will be the new Bjork!". MSN. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved January 3, 2014. "will.i.am – Chart history". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 22, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "Lil Twist Enlists Justin Bieber and Miley Cyrus for New Single 'Twerk'". Rap-Up. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved September 10, 2013. "Mike Will Made It Teases Wiz Khalifa, Miley Cyrus & Juicy J Featured Single 23". Rap Dose. May 23, 2013. Archived from the original on February 22, 2023. Retrieved September 10, 2013. "Mike Will Made-It - Chart history". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 19, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2013. "Miley Cyrus' 'We Can't Stop' Single Due June 3". Billboard. May 19, 2013. Archived from the original on October 9, 2013. Retrieved September 10, 2013. Hung, Steffen. "Miley Cyrus – We Can't Stop". charts.nz. Archived from the original on May 18, 2017. Retrieved September 10, 2013. "Miley Cyrus earns first UK number one single with 'We Can't Stop' – Music News". Digital Spy. August 11, 2013. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved September 10, 2013. "Miley Cyrus' 'We Can't Stop' Video Breaks VEVO Record". Billboard. July 29, 2013. Archived from the original on September 17, 2013. Retrieved September 10, 2013. "Note to Miley Cyrus: Please Stop; Plus Other VMAs Ruminations". The Hollywood Reporter. August 26, 2013. Archived from the original on August 26, 2013. Retrieved August 26, 2013. Kroll, Katy (August 22, 2014). "Twerk It Out: Miley and Robin's VMA Performance, One Year Later". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved January 29, 2015. Gilman, Greg (September 10, 2013). "Miley Cyrus' 'Wrecking Ball' Smashes One Direction's VEVO Record". The Wrap. Archived from the original on September 12, 2013. Retrieved September 14, 2013. Garcia, Thania (August 25, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Addresses Sinéad O'Connor Feud Over 'Wrecking Ball': 'I Had No Idea About the Fragile Mental State She Was In'". Variety. Archived from the original on September 6, 2023. Retrieved September 6, 2023. Trust, Gary (February 16, 2023). "Ask Billboard: Where Does 'Flowers' (Already) Rank Among Miley Cyrus' Biggest Hits?". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 17, 2023. Retrieved September 6, 2023. Trust, Gary (September 18, 2013). "Miley Cyrus' 'Wrecking Ball' Swings Atop Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 20, 2013. Retrieved September 18, 2013. "MTV to Premiere 'Miley: The Movement' Tonight at 10PM (Video)". TVbytheNumbers. October 2, 2013. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2013. "Miley: The Movement Sneak Peek: Singer Says Mom Tish Cyrus Is My Homie". E! Online. October 2, 2013. Archived from the original on August 6, 2023. Retrieved October 7, 2013. "iTunes – Music – Bangerz (Deluxe Version) by Miley Cyrus". iTunes Store (AU). Apple Inc. October 4, 2013. Archived from the original on October 12, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2013. Caulfield, Keith (October 16, 2013). "Miley Cyrus' 'Bangerz' Debuts At No. 1 On Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 1, 2018. Retrieved October 16, 2013. "Miley Cyrus Hosted Worst SNL Episode in Recent History". Guardian Liberty Voice. August 13, 2013. Archived from the original on February 22, 2023. Retrieved October 7, 2013. "MTV to World Premiere Future's New Music Video "Real & True" Featuring Miley Cyrus Immediately Before "2013 MTV EMA" Telecast Sunday, November 10 at 6:55PM ET/PT". The Futon Critic. November 5, 2013. Archived from the original on September 12, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2013. "MTV declares Miley Cyrus its artist of the year". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Associated Press. December 9, 2013. Archived from the original on March 25, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2014. "Miley Cyrus 'Unplugged': 10 Hilarious, Twerkcentric Observations". Rolling Stone. January 29, 2014. Archived from the original on January 31, 2014. Retrieved January 29, 2014. Lee, Ashley (February 6, 2014). "Miley Cyrus' Uncensored 'MTV Unplugged' Performance Released". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 6, 2014. Karimzadeh, Marc (January 9, 2014). "Marc Jacobs Taps Miley Cyrus for Spring Campaign". Women's Wear Daily. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved April 5, 2014. Farber, Jim (April 4, 2014). "Bangerz Tour is Campy and Surreal". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on April 11, 2023. Retrieved July 31, 2014. Deen, Sarah (February 15, 2014). "Miley Cyrus Bangerz tour kicks off in Canada: 11 weird moments from the first show". Metro Canada. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2014. Duke, Alan (April 18, 2014). "Miley Cyrus faces long recovery from 'extreme allergic reaction'". CNN. Archived from the original on February 22, 2023. Retrieved April 29, 2014. Gutierrez, Lisa (April 21, 2014). "Miley Cyrus leaves Kansas City for undisclosed location, still hospitalized". The Kansas City Star. Archived from the original on April 23, 2014. "Flaming Lips' 'Sgt. Peppers' Tribute Album Out this Fall". Rolling Stone. May 16, 2014. Archived from the original on May 15, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014. Dennis, Jon (October 30, 2014). "The Flaming Lips: With a Little Help from My Fwends review – predictable Beatles cover album". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 22, 2023. Retrieved May 7, 2015. Krause, Katie (January 26, 2015). "Miley Cyrus Works on New Album 'Every Day,' Thought Grammy Nom Was a 'Joke'". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on February 22, 2015. Retrieved February 17, 2015. Margaret, Mary (August 24, 2014). "Miley Cyrus Teases Her New Music: 'It's Not About Twerking'". People. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved March 7, 2019. Reed, Ryan (May 4, 2015). "The Flaming Lips, Miley Cyrus Plot Trippy Collaborative LP". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 6, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. "The Untitled X-Mas Project, starring Seth Rogen & Joseph Gordon Levitt, is filming at Rockefeller Center today". onlocationvacations.com. January 5, 2015. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2015. Aswad, Jem (August 24, 2015). "Miley Cyrus' Next Album is 'Not a Miley Record'". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 28, 2015. Retrieved September 1, 2015. Ermac, Raffy (August 30, 2015). "Young Stars Give Good Face for Miley Cyrus, VMAs' First Pansexual Host". The Advocate. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Coscarelli, Joe (August 31, 2015). "Inside the Making of 'Dead Petz,' Miley Cyrus's Surprise Album". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 26, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2015. Wood, Mikael (September 1, 2015). "'Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz': a wrecking ball in need of a target". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 3, 2015. Retrieved September 3, 2015. "Sex, death and sadness: A look inside Miley's free 'Dead Petz' album". Mashable. September 2, 2015. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved September 3, 2015. "2015: The Year Teen Pop Grew Up". Rolling Stone. December 14, 2015. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2016. Levine, Nick (September 1, 2015). "NME Reviews – Miley Cyrus – 'Miley Cyrus And Her Dead Petz'". NME. Archived from the original on September 3, 2015. Retrieved September 2, 2015. Farber, Jim (August 31, 2015). "'Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz' : Album Review". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on September 2, 2015. Retrieved August 31, 2015. "Miley Cyrus Leaves Pop Behind (For Now) on 'Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz': Album Review". Billboard. August 31, 2015. Archived from the original on July 25, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2015. Anderson, Kyle (September 1, 2015). "'Miley Cyrus and Her Dead Petz' review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 3, 2015. Retrieved September 2, 2015. Halperin, Shirley (September 10, 2015). "What's Next for Miley Cyrus?". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015. Retrieved March 5, 2020. "Miley Cyrus New Album For 2016 Confirmed? Singer Engaged Again To Liam Hemsworth?". Youth Health Magazine. January 17, 2016. Archived from the original on May 6, 2017. Retrieved July 31, 2016. Stanhope, Kate (March 25, 2016). "Miley Cyrus Joining 'The Voice' as a Coach". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved March 25, 2016. Iannucci, Rebecca (March 25, 2016). "The Voice: Miley Cyrus, Alicia Keys Confirmed as Season 11 Coaches". TVLine. United States. Archived from the original on August 12, 2016. Retrieved March 25, 2016. Chi, Paul (September 16, 2016). "Miley Cyrus Explains Why She's in Awe of Woody Allen: 'He's Never Fake'". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on September 19, 2020. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (August 8, 2016). "Watch First Clip From Woody Allen's 'Crisis in Six Scenes' TV Show". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 23, 2017. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Bradley, Bill (September 17, 2016). "Miley Cyrus Pauses Performance To Comment On Fallon's Trump Controversy". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on May 17, 2017. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Norris, John (May 3, 2017). "Miley Cyrus Breaks Silence on Rootsy New Music, Fiance Liam Hemsworth & America: 'Unity Is What We Need'". Billboard. United States. Archived from the original on May 4, 2017. Retrieved May 4, 2017. Trust, Gary (May 18, 2017). "Hot 100 Chart Moves: Miley Cyrus Makes Waves With 'Malibu'". Billboard. United States. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Strauss, Matthew (June 9, 2017). "Listen to Miley Cyrus' New Song "Inspired"". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Retrieved July 15, 2021. "Miley Cyrus". Miley Cyrus. Archived from the original on October 9, 2009. Retrieved August 23, 2017. "Miley Cyrus wraca z Younger Now: data premiery i okładka nowej płyty 2017". Eska.pl. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2017. "Miley Cyrus - Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 1, 2018. Retrieved November 24, 2021. Chen, Joyce (August 27, 2017). "VMAs 2017: Watch Miley Cyrus Go Retro in 'Younger Now' Performance". Rolling Stone. United States. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2017. "Miley Cyrus Returned To Live Lounge And Performed 'See You Again' In The Year 2017". MTV News. September 15, 2017. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved September 15, 2017. Farley, Rebecca. "Miley Cyrus Performed "The Climb" For The First Time In Years — & It Was Chilling". Refinery29. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "March For Our Lives: Miley Cyrus, Kim Kardashian & More Show Support In and Beyond D.C." Billboard. Archived from the original on June 26, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Wagmeister, Elizabeth (October 18, 2016). "'The Voice' Renewed Through Season 13 — Which Coaches Are Returning?". Variety. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved August 23, 2017. Sheehan, Paul (May 11, 2017). "'The Voice': Jennifer Hudson, Miley Cyrus to coach in season 13". Goldderby.com. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved August 23, 2017. "Miley Cyrus Confirms She's 'Done' With 'The Voice', Won't Return For Season 14". October 5, 2017. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved November 24, 2017. "Miley Cyrus Isn't Releasing Any More 'Younger Now' Singles". MTV. October 30, 2017. Archived from the original on December 6, 2018. Retrieved November 4, 2017. Quinn, Dave (September 17, 2017). "Miley Cyrus Is Already 'Over' Her New Album: 'I Want To Figure Out What I Want to Do Next'". People. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved November 29, 2018. "Miley Cyrus and Mark Ronson Have a Song 'Coming Soon'". Billboard. June 27, 2018. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved August 11, 2018. "Miley Cyrus to release new single "Nothing Breaks Like a Heart"". Consequence Of Sound.net. November 26, 2018. Archived from the original on January 17, 2023. Retrieved January 17, 2023. "Miley Cyrus Confirms a Release Date for "Nothing Breaks Like a Heart"". Idolator.com. November 26, 2018. "Miley Cyrus Just Deleted All of Her Instagram Posts". Time.com. Archived from the original on April 11, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2018. Cubit, Brea (October 19, 2020). "19 Times Miley Cyrus Honoured Other Artists With Applause-Worthy Song Covers". POPSUGAR Entertainment UK. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Miley Cyrus sings Dolly Parton's hit duet Islands In the Stream as tribute to the legend". The News International. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Miley Cyrus Joins Shawn Mendes for 'In My Blood' at 2019 Grammys". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 26, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Elton John Announces Two Cover Albums Featuring Miley Cyrus, Lady Gaga and Ed Sheeran". E!. March 15, 2018. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Miley Cyrus version of Elton John's 'The Bitch is Back' could not be a more appropriate choice for her". Leosigh.com. April 6, 2018. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Blistein, Jon (May 27, 2019). "Miley Cyrus Plots New Project 'She Is Coming'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved May 27, 2019. Caulfield, Keith (June 9, 2019). "Thomas Rhett Scores Second No. 1 on Billboard 200 Albums Chart With 'Center Point Road'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 22, 2019. Retrieved June 10, 2019. McIntyre, Hugh (June 15, 2019). "Katy Perry, Cardi B And Miley Cyrus: Five Important Moves On This Week's Hot 100". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 6, 2019. Retrieved June 15, 2019. "MTV VMAs 2020: Best Editing award goes to Miley Cyrus's 'Mother's Daughter', Internet bows to 'the queen'". meaww. August 31, 2020. Archived from the original on September 30, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Wuki". Grammy Awards. November 23, 2020. Archived from the original on September 26, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Miley Cyrus Performs as Ashley O, Brings Out Her Dad & Lil Nas X at Glastonbury: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 27, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Brooks, Hayden (May 15, 2019). "'Black Mirror' Season 5 Trailer Stars Miley Cyrus, Unveils Release Date". iHeartRadio. Archived from the original on February 23, 2023. Retrieved June 15, 2019. "Is Miley Cyrus' 'Black Mirror' Episode Part of #FreeBritney?". Paper. June 6, 2019. Archived from the original on February 23, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Spruch, Kirsten (June 13, 2019). "Ashley O Is Back: Listen to New Miley Cyrus 'Black Mirror' Song 'Right Where I Belong'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 3, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2019. "On a Roll – Single by Ashley O on Apple Music". Apple Inc. June 14, 2019. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved June 15, 2019. "Miley Cyrus, Ariana Grande, Lana Del Rey team up for Charlie's Angels theme song". Entertainment Weekly. June 27, 2019. Archived from the original on November 8, 2019. Retrieved July 24, 2019. Garvey, Marianne (September 13, 2019). "Ariana Grande, Miley Cyrus and Lana Del Rey release 'Don't Call Me Angel' video". CNN. Archived from the original on September 25, 2019. Retrieved September 25, 2019. Yang, Rachel (August 16, 2019). "Miley Cyrus releases emotional breakup song 'Slide Away' after Liam Hemsworth split". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 28, 2023. Retrieved August 16, 2019. Barbour, Shannon (September 6, 2019). "Fans Are Freaking Out About Miley Cyrus's "Slide Away" Music Video and All the Liam Hemsworth Easter Eggs". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on September 11, 2019. Retrieved September 13, 2019. Copsey, Rob (August 14, 2020). "Miley Cyrus isn't planning to release an album any time soon: 'It doesn't make sense for me'". Archived from the original on September 18, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020. Cyrus, Miley (November 12, 2018). "Completely devastated by the fires affecting my family. I am one of the lucky ones. My animals and..." Miley Cyrus on Facebook. Archived from the original on November 7, 2023. Retrieved July 17, 2022. "Miley Cyrus and Stevie Nicks join forces for 'Midnight Sky/Edge of Seventeen' mash-up". NME. November 6, 2020. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Spanos, Brittany (October 23, 2020). "Miley Cyrus Announces Seventh Album 'Plastic Hearts'". Archived from the original on October 25, 2020. Retrieved October 23, 2020. Curto, Justin (October 16, 2020). "Here's What Happened in Miley Cyrus's MTV Unplugged 'Backyard Sessions' Special". Vulture. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2021. ""She is Miley Cyrus", todo lo que debes saber del álbum". Grupo Legado (in Spanish). Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Buksbaum, Sydney (November 20, 2020). "Miley Cyrus and Dua Lipa Take a Sexy, Bloody Road Trip in 'Prisoner' Music Video". People. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved November 26, 2020. "Plastic Hearts by Miley Cyrus". Spotify. November 27, 2020. Archived from the original on August 20, 2021. Retrieved November 27, 2020. Kastrenakes, Jacob (May 20, 2020). "Here are all the winners of the 2020 Webby Awards". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 2, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Sahadeo, Andy (January 25, 2021). "What is the TikTok Tailgate? Everything you need to know". Fox News. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2021. Tuccillo, Andrea (March 9, 2021). "Miley Cyrus releases 'Angels Like You' video with message encouraging COVID-19 vaccination". ABC News. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved April 2, 2021. "Miley Cyrus Signs With Columbia Records: Exclusive". Billboard. March 4, 2021. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2021. Aswad, Jem (March 4, 2021). "Miley Cyrus Signs With Columbia Records". Variety. Archived from the original on March 4, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2021. "Miley Cyrus's Letter to Hannah Montana Is Making Us Emotional". Teen Vogue. March 25, 2021. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Weaver, Hilary (March 6, 2021). "Miley Cyrus Says That 'Hannah Montana' Gave Her an 'Identity Crisis'". Elle. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Presley, James Kenneth (March 25, 2021). "'Hannah Montana' cast reunion: Will there be a revival of the Disney classic?". Film Daily. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Kaufman, Gil (April 23, 2021). "Miley Cyrus Finally Reveals When Her Kid Laroi Remix Will Drop". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 25, 2021. Retrieved April 25, 2021. Jaipuriar, Rashika. "Miley Cyrus coming to Indianapolis, NCAA Final Four to perform tribute to frontline workers". The Indianapolis Star. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2021. "At Miley Cyrus' Intimate Pride Concert in Nashville, Love and Rainbows Were in the Air". Consequence. June 9, 2021. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Evans, Greg (May 14, 2021). "Miley Cyrus Teams With NBCUniversal For Overall Deal; Pride Concert Special Named First Project". Deadline. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved May 15, 2021. "Metallica Covers Album to Feature Phoebe Bridgers, Moses Sumney, St. Vincent, Mac DeMarco, and More". Pitchfork. June 22, 2021. Archived from the original on June 29, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "WATCH: Miley Cyrus teases Elton John, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Metallica collaboration". Capital. Archived from the original on June 17, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Rick Owens and Miley Cyrus on Rock Stars, Recklessness, and Life on the Road". Interview. October 19, 2020. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Wang, Jessica (June 16, 2021). "Miley Cyrus Reveals Her Lower Back Tattoo, Along With New Tour Dates, With New String Bikini Pic". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Lollapalooza bringing Foo Fighters, The Strokes, Miley Cyrus & more to South America in 2022". Consequence. October 28, 2021. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved October 30, 2021. Schneider, Michael (November 29, 2021). "Miley Cyrus and Pete Davidson to Host New Year's Eve Special for NBC, From Exec Producer Lorne Michaels". Variety. Archived from the original on November 29, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Pedersen, Erik (December 20, 2021). "Performers Set For NBC's Miley Cyrus-Pete Davidson New Year's Eve Special – Watch The Promo". Deadline. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Iasimone, Ashley (March 27, 2022). "Miley Cyrus Tearfully Dedicates 'Angels Like You' to Taylor Hawkins at Lollapalooza Brazil". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 30, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Arena, Crypto com. "Bud Light Super Bowl Music Fest: Green Day & Miley Cyrus | Crypto.com Arena". www.cryptoarena.com. Archived from the original on May 22, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. "Miley Cyrus recovering from COVID after Latin American tour: 'It was worth it'". www.hola.com. Archived from the original on May 28, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Kreps, Daniel (March 27, 2022). "Miley Cyrus Announces First-Ever New Live Album 'Attention: Miley Live'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 29, 2022. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Major, Michael. "VIDEO: Miley Cyrus Releases 'Never Be Me' From 'ATTENTION: MILEY LIVE' Album". Broadway World. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved June 10, 2022. "Miley Cyrus - ATTENTION: MILEY LIVE". Clash Magazine. April 7, 2022. Archived from the original on June 2, 2022. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Rowley, Glenn (April 25, 2022). "Miley Cyrus Announces Deluxe Version of 'Attention: Miley Live'". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 25, 2022. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Cyrus, Miley [@MileyCyrus] (April 28, 2022). "On 4/29 I'm adding MORE songs to the #ATTENTION live album! Including Angels Like You which was added into the set the night before inspired by the fans below my hotel room in Bogota singing it ALL NIGHT LONG! Woke up to Angels being #1 in Colombia!" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Del Rosario, Alexandra (May 16, 2022). "Miley Cyrus Returning To Host NBC's New Year's Eve Special – Upfronts". Deadline. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved July 17, 2022. Verhoeven, Beatrice (June 25, 2022). "Miley Cyrus on Challenges of 'Miley's New Year's Eve Party' and Why Pete Davidson Was the Best Co-Host". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 6, 2024. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Porter, Rick (August 29, 2022). "Dolly Parton NBC Holiday Movie Sets Cast". Deadline. Archived from the original on March 14, 2023. Retrieved September 4, 2022. Willman, Chris (December 25, 2022). "Morrissey Says Miley Cyrus Wants Off His Next Album, and He's Split With Label and Management, Too". Variety. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved December 26, 2022. Kreps, Daniel (December 24, 2022). "Morrissey Album Likely Delayed Again as Miley Cyrus Wants Guest Spot Taken Off". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2022. Garner, Glenn (November 21, 2022). "Miley Cyrus Is Making New Music with 'Bangerz' Producer Mike WiLL Made-It to Debut in 2023". People. Dotdash Meredith. Archived from the original on January 1, 2023. Retrieved January 2, 2023. Rowley, Glenn (December 19, 2022). "Does Miley Cyrus Have New Music Coming? Here's Why Fans Think So – Billboard". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2022. Wilkes, Emma (December 17, 2022). "Miley Cyrus teases new music for 2023: "New Year, new Miley"". NME. Archived from the original on December 30, 2022. Retrieved January 3, 2023. Henderson, Taylor (December 19, 2022). "Miley Cyrus Teases New Era: 'New Year, New Miley'". Out. Archived from the original on January 7, 2023. Retrieved January 15, 2023. Gularte, Alejandra (January 1, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Will Bring Us 'Flowers' in the New Year". Vulture. New York. Archived from the original on January 3, 2023. Retrieved January 3, 2023. June, Sophia (December 19, 2022). "Miley Cyrus Teases New Music for 2023". Nylon. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. Retrieved January 15, 2023. Lane, Lexi (December 16, 2022). "Miley Cyrus Appears To Be Teasing Music For The 'New Year' As Fans Spot Her Cryptic Global Posters". Uproxx. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. Retrieved January 15, 2023. Varvaris, Mary (December 20, 2022). "Miley Cyrus Teases New Music: 'NEW YEAR, NEW MILEY'". The Music. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. Retrieved January 15, 2023. Rice, Nicholas (January 1, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Announces New Single 'Flowers' During New Year's Eve Special: 'New Year, New Miley'". People. Archived from the original on January 1, 2023. Retrieved January 1, 2023. Havens, Lyndsey (January 1, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Announces New Single 'Flowers' During 'Miley's New Year's Eve Party'". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 1, 2023. Retrieved January 5, 2022. Mier, Tomás (January 12, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Doesn't Need a Man on New Single 'Flowers'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved January 15, 2023. Bloom, Madison (January 12, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Shares Video for New Song "Flowers"". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. Retrieved January 15, 2023. Trust, Gary (January 24, 2023). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 25, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2023. Trust, Gary (January 24, 2023). "'Flowers' Power: Miley Cyrus Soars In at No. 1 on Both Billboard Global Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 25, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2023. Trust, Gary (January 2, 2024). "Mariah Carey's 'All I Want for Christmas Is You' Leads All-Holiday Top 10s on Billboard Global Charts". Billboard. Retrieved January 2, 2024. Trust, Gary (January 24, 2023). "'Flowers' Power: Miley Cyrus Soars In at No. 1 on Both Billboard Global Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 25, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2023. Trust, Gary (March 27, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Holds Atop Hot 100, Coi Leray & Bailey Zimmerman Score First Top 10s". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 27, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023. Molanphy, Chris (January 28, 2023). "Why Miley Cyrus' "Flowers" Is Her First No. 1 Song in a Decade". Slate. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2023. Unterberger, Andrew (January 24, 2023). "Five Reasons Why Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Became Her First No. 1 Hit in a Decade". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2023. Garcia, Thania (April 7, 2023). "Global Music Streams Hit 1 Trillion Milestone as Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Is Crowned Most-Consumed Song of 2023". Variety. Retrieved February 7, 2024. McIntyre, Hugh (July 5, 2023). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Is Still The Biggest Song In The World, Half A Year After It Was Released". Forbes. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Horowitz, Steven J. (November 27, 2023). "Behind Miley Cyrus' Smash Hit 'Flowers': 'She's Not Afraid to Go After What She Wants'". Variety. Retrieved February 7, 2024. * Miller, Logan (January 30, 2024). ""Flowers" by Miley Cyrus is a success in full bloom". CKMB-FM. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Ryan, Gavin (January 30, 2023). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Dominates Charts Worldwide". The Music. Retrieved February 7, 2024. "Debuts dominate as DMA's score #2". Australian Recording Industry Association. April 7, 2023. Archived from the original on April 8, 2023. Retrieved April 8, 2023. "Billboard Canadian Hot 100: Week of May 6, 2023". Billboard. April 25, 2023. Archived from the original on May 4, 2023. Retrieved May 4, 2023. "Miley Cyrus — Flowers". Les classement single (in French). SNEP. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved May 4, 2023. "Amigos feiern 15. Nummer-1-Album; Miley Cyrus und Udo Lindenberg mit neuen Karriererekorden - Offizielle Deutsche Charts". GfK Entertainment charts (in German). January 27, 2023. Archived from the original on January 27, 2023. Retrieved January 27, 2023. Brandle, Lars (March 27, 2023). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Logs 10th Week at U.K. Chart Summit". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 4, 2023. Retrieved May 4, 2023. Robinson, Kimi (November 29, 2023). "Taylor Swift is Spotify's most-streamed artist. Who follows her at the top may surprise you". USA Today. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Garcia, Thania (November 28, 2023). "Taylor Swift Named Apple Music's Artist of the Year; Morgan Wallen Tops Global Songs Chart". Variety. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Savage, Mark (November 29, 2023). "Taylor Swift is the UK's most-streamed artist of 2023". BBC Online. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Chan, Anna; Trapunski, Richard (November 29, 2023). "Drake And The Weeknd Among Spotify's Most Streamed Artists Of 2023". Billboard Canada. Retrieved November 29, 2023. "2023: La dynamique de la production et de la consommation musicales en France" [The dynamics of musical production and consumption in France] (in French). SNEP. January 8, 2024. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Caulfield, Keith (January 10, 2024). "Morgan Wallen's 'One Thing at a Time' Is Luminate's Top Album of 2023 in U.S." Billboard. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Willman, Chris (January 20, 2023). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Breaks Spotify's All-Time One-Week Record, With 100 Million-Plus Streams". Variety. Archived from the original on January 21, 2023. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Rowley, Glenn (May 4, 2023). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Hits 1 Billion Streams on Spotify in Record Time". Billboard. Retrieved February 7, 2024. McIntyre, Hugh (February 2, 2024). "Miley Cyrus Replaces Taylor Swift At No. 1 And Makes History–Again". Forbes. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Frankenberg, Eric (November 21, 2023). "Miley Cyrus & Taylor Swift Rule 2023's Billboard Global Charts". Billboard. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Decter, Rosie Long (December 28, 2023). "The Biggest Differences Between Billboard's Canadian and American Year-End Hot 100 Charts". Billboard Canada. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Brandle, Lars (January 3, 2024). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Stands Tall on Year-End U.K. Singles Chart". Billboard. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Brandle, Lars (January 12, 2024). "Taylor Swift and Miley Cyrus Reign Over Australia's End Of Year Charts". Billboard. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Trust, Gary (November 21, 2023). "Morgan Wallen Is the No. 1 Billboard Hot 100 Artist of 2023 & 'Last Night' Is Top Song". Billboard. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Brandle, Lars (February 26, 2024). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Wins IFPI Global Single Award For 2023". Billboard. Retrieved February 26, 2024. Rowley, Glenn (March 3, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Drops Demo Version of 'Flowers': Stream It Now". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 3, 2023. Retrieved March 8, 2023. Dailey, Hannah (January 5, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Announces New Album 'Endless Summer Vacation': Here's When It Arrives". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 5, 2023. Retrieved January 5, 2023. Irvin, Jack (January 5, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Announces New Album 'Endless Summer Vacation' — Her 'Love Letter' to Los Angeles". People. Archived from the original on January 17, 2023. Retrieved January 5, 2023. Garcia, Thania (January 5, 2023). "Miley Cyrus to Release New Album 'Endless Summer Vacation' in March, Drops Teaser Trailer". Variety. Archived from the original on January 5, 2023. Retrieved January 5, 2023. Kaufman, Gil (February 27, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Reveals 'Endless Summer Vacation' Tracklist Featuring Two Surprise Collabs". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved February 27, 2023. Caulfield, Keith (March 19, 2023). "Morgan Wallen Spends Second Week at No. 1 on Billboard 200 With 'One Thing at a Time'". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 19, 2023. Retrieved March 20, 2023. Rowley, Glenn (March 10, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Drops 'River' Music Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 10, 2023. Retrieved March 28, 2023. "A recap of radio add recaps". Hits. March 14, 2023. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Murray, Gordon (March 23, 2023). "Miley Cyrus' 'River' Flows Onto Hot Dance/Electronic Songs Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 28, 2023. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Pilley, Max (May 18, 2023). "Miley Cyrus shares new video for 'Jaded'". DIY. Retrieved February 8, 2024. Bowenbank, Starr (March 27, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Thanks Fans for 'Flowers' 8th Week at No. 1, Drops 'Jaded' Backyard Session". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 25, 2023. Retrieved May 25, 2023. "Jaded" is currently at No. 56 on the chart. Mier, Tomás (May 16, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Strips Down in the Dreamy 'Jaded' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved May 18, 2023. Blistein, Jon (March 3, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Reviving the 'Backyard Sessions' for 'Endless Summer Vacation' Special". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 30, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023. Aswad, Jem (March 3, 2023). "Miley Cyrus and Disney Reunite for 'Endless Summer Vacation (Backyard Sessions)'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 4, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023. Paul, Larisha (March 10, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Needs No Audience or Introduction in 'Endless Summer Vacation' Special". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Stern, Marlow (June 8, 2023). "See Miley Cyrus Like You've Never Seen Her Before". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 9, 2023. Retrieved June 10, 2023. Petski, Denise (August 17, 2023). "Miley Cyrus To Release New Song "Used To Be Young" With ABC Special". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 24, 2023. Retrieved August 17, 2023. Trust, Gary (September 5, 2023). "Zach Bryan & Kacey Musgraves' 'I Remember Everything' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Aniftos, Rania (October 20, 2023). "Dolly Parton Reveals Why She Included 'Wrecking Ball' on Upcoming 'Rockstar' Album: 'I Love My Miley'". Billboard. Retrieved February 7, 2024. "2023 Year-End Charts: Top Artists". Billboard. Retrieved March 1, 2024. Garcia, Thania; Murphy, J. Kim (February 4, 2024). "Miley Cyrus Wins Her First Grammys Ever for 'Flowers'". Variety. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Saperstein, Pat (February 23, 2024). "Who Was Cynthia Plaster Caster, Who Inspired Miley Cyrus' Character in Ethan Coen's 'Drive Away Dolls'?". Variety. Retrieved February 25, 2024. Paul, Larisha (March 1, 2024). "Miley Cyrus and Pharrell Reunite For First Time in a Decade on 'Doctor (Work It Out)'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 1, 2024. Dunworth, Liberty (January 31, 2024). "Lorde, The National, Girl In Red and more to feature on star-studded 'Stop Making Sense' tribute album 'Everyone's Getting Involved'". NME. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Madarang, Charisma (January 31, 2024). "Paramore Put on the Big Suit for 'Burning Down The House' Talking Heads Cover". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Viswanath, Jake (March 28, 2024). "Beyoncé & Miley Cyrus' Duet "II Most Wanted" Is A True Ride-Or-Die Anthem". Bustle. Retrieved March 28, 2024. Brathwaite, Lester Fabian (March 28, 2024). "Beyoncé's Cowboy Carter features a Miley duet, a Beatles cover, and cameos from Dolly Parton and Willie Nelson". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved March 28, 2024. Brasil, Sydney (March 18, 2024). "Sinéad O'Connor Remembered by Bratz with Her Own Doll". Exclaim!. Retrieved March 18, 2024. "Miley Cyrus". AllMusic. Archived from the original on March 12, 2023. Retrieved March 12, 2023. Nass, Liz (January 14, 2022). "Miley Cyrus trailblazes on the iTunes charts". State News. Archived from the original on March 18, 2022. Retrieved March 21, 2022. Zoladz, Lindsay (December 1, 2020). "Miley Cyrus Finally Embraces Her Rock 'n' Roll Heart". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 21, 2022. Retrieved March 21, 2022. Miley Cyrus Talks Malibu, Sobriety & Liam Hemsworth. Zach Sang. Archived from the original on December 13, 2021. Diehl, Matt (June 14, 2013). "Miley Cyrus 2.0: The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 26, 2013. Retrieved October 3, 2013. Ganz, Caryn (June 20, 2014). "Lana Del Rey: Ultraviolence". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 23, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2014. Mander, Harjeet (July 4, 2008). "Miley Cyrus Wants To Be The Next Madonna". Entertainment Wise. Archived from the original on July 7, 2008. Retrieved April 18, 2013. "Miley Cyrus: Quiere ser la nueva Madonna" (in Spanish). ADNMundo.com. July 8, 2008. Archived from the original on June 28, 2013. Retrieved April 18, 2013. Oliver, Sarah (September 4, 2014). She Can't Stop - Miley Cyrus: The Biography. Kings Road. ISBN 978-1-78418-197-0. Archived from the original on February 6, 2024. Retrieved April 15, 2022. Kilkelly, Daniel (July 5, 2008). "Miley Cyrus hopes to emulate Madonna". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on February 25, 2015. Retrieved April 18, 2013. "Miley Cyrus lists her top 5 female influences". Thecornernews.com. Archived from the original on March 17, 2020. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "Artists Following Miley Cyrus". MTV. Archived from the original on March 13, 2014. Retrieved July 8, 2016. "Hannah Montana Soundtrack – Music Review". Common Sense Media. June 29, 2007. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "CD Review: Hannah Montana 2 – Meet Miley Cyrus". Cinema Blend. June 27, 2007. Archived from the original on July 2, 2007. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "Hannah Montana 2: Meet Miley Cyrus – Music Review". Common Sense Media. June 29, 2007. Retrieved April 29, 2013. Wood, Mikael (July 21, 2008). "Miley Cyrus' 'Breakout': A long way from Montana". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 29, 2013. Phares, Heather (July 22, 2008). "Breakout – Miley Cyrus : Songs, Reviews, Credits, Awards". AllMusic. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "Miley Cyrus Reminds Us She Can Seriously Sing With Paul Simon Cover On 'SNL 40'". vh1.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2015. Retrieved February 15, 2015. "Miley Cyrus Joins The Ranks Of The Be-Fanged In 'Hotel Transylvania'". Mtv.com. Retrieved July 31, 2016. Coetzee, Nikita (October 19, 2020). "Miley Cyrus' incredible performance with her sister for MTV Unplugged will give you chills". News24. Retrieved November 26, 2020. "Miley Cyrus proves she has a voice for rock with viral TikTok covers". The Georgetown Voice. November 20, 2020. Retrieved November 26, 2020. Lutas, Vicki. "Miley Cyrus – Party in the U.S.A." BBC News. Retrieved August 28, 2010. Levine, Nick (November 9, 2009). "Miley Cyrus: 'The Time Of Our Lives'". Digital Spy. Hearst Corporation. Retrieved October 8, 2010. "CD review: Breakout, Miley Cyrus". The Gazette. Canada. July 23, 2008. Archived from the original on July 29, 2008. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "Miley Cyrus: Summer Album Preview 2010". Billboard. May 26, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2013. Donahue, Anne (May 28, 2010). "Miley Cyrus: The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. pp. 3–4. Retrieved February 9, 2014. Dinh, James (December 9, 2009). "Miley Cyrus Covers Poison's 'Every Rose Has Its Thorn'". MTV News. Viacom. Retrieved February 9, 2014. "Miley Cyrus to make "Dirty South Hip Hop Album"". Fist in the Air. November 10, 2012. Archived from the original on April 4, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2013. Lipshutz, Jason (October 1, 2013). "Miley Cyrus, 'Bangerz': Track-By-Track Review". Billboard. Retrieved October 1, 2013. Ellen DeGeneres, Miley Cyrus (2013). Miley Discusses Her Relationship with Liam Hemsworth (YouTube). Burbank, California: The Ellen DeGeneres Show. Event occurs at 1:06 minutes. Archived from the original on December 13, 2021. Retrieved October 12, 2013. "Miley Cyrus says new album is inspired by Britney Spears and Metallica". UK Official Charts. September 10, 2020. Retrieved December 7, 2020. Johnston, Maura (March 11, 2023). "Miley Cyrus Sums Up Everything She's Great At On 'Endless Summer Vacation'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2023. "Miley Cyrus dons yet another risque outfit". Fox News. Retrieved February 20, 2020. "Miley Cyrus Performs 'Party in the U.S.A.'". MTV News. Viacom. August 10, 2009. Retrieved August 10, 2009. Kahn, Robert (August 10, 2009). "Miley Cyrus' pole-dancing performance sparks criticism". Newsday. Retrieved June 4, 2010. "Miley Cyrus on Her Racy 'Britain's Got Talent' Performance: 'Get Over It!'". Access Online. June 5, 2010. Retrieved October 2, 2019. Wyatt, Daisy (August 28, 2013). "The tongue, the twerking, the teddy outfit: Should someone have stopped Miley Cyrus' VMA performance?". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on March 5, 2017. Retrieved September 10, 2013. Steiner, B. J. (August 26, 2013). "The Most Awkward Hip-Hop Moments at MTV's 2013 Video Music Awards". XXL Magazine. Retrieved August 26, 2013. Papalia, Daniel (August 21, 2014). "Miley Cyrus Banned From Performing in Dominican Republic". Forbes. Retrieved August 22, 2014. Abramowitz, Rachel (May 28, 2008). "All lenses are on Miley". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 1, 2012. Retrieved June 4, 2010. Osmond, Donny (April 30, 2009). "Miley Cyrus – The 2008 TIME 100". Time. Retrieved June 4, 2010. Vick, Megan (October 8, 2010). "Miley Cyrus Hits the Club in 'Who Owns My Heart' Clip". Billboard. Retrieved October 15, 2010. Ziegbe, Mawuse (October 9, 2010). "Miley Cyrus 'Who Owns My Heart' Video Blasted By Parents Television Council". MTV News. Viacom. Retrieved October 15, 2010. Parton, Dolly (April 23, 2014). "Miley Cyrus". Time. Retrieved May 2, 2014. "Celebrity 100 » #17 Miley Cyrus". Forbes. Retrieved July 1, 2014. "Miley Cyrus' life turned into a comic book". The Daily Telegraph. August 13, 2014. Archived from the original on August 14, 2014. Retrieved August 13, 2014. Blake, Emily (August 14, 2014). "Miley Cyrus Is Getting Her Own Comic Book: Get A Sneak Peek". MTV. Retrieved August 15, 2014. "21 Under 21: Miley Cyrus". Billboard. September 23, 2010. Retrieved August 15, 2014. "Billboard Ranks Music's Hottest 21 Under 21! Can You Guess Who's Number 1?! (Pics)". teen.com. Clevver Network. Archived from the original on March 5, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2017. Maloy, Sarah (September 17, 2012). "Miley Cyrus: 21 Under 21 (2012)". Billboard. Retrieved August 15, 2014. "Miley Cyrus: Number 1 On Maxim's Hot 100". Maxim. May 10, 2013. Retrieved April 7, 2014. "Miley Cyrus Makes Time's Person of the Year List". Entertainment Tonight. December 10, 2013. Archived from the original on April 21, 2014. Retrieved April 5, 2014. Franceschi, Lorenzo (December 5, 2013). "Egyptian General Trumps Miley to Win 'Time' Person of the Year Poll". Mashable. Retrieved January 12, 2014. "Skidmore College Will Offer a Class on Miley Cyrus". ABC News. March 27, 2014. Retrieved May 11, 2014. "Person of the Year: The Finalists". The Advocate. November 5, 2015. Retrieved November 6, 2015. David, Mark (July 23, 2020). "Miley Cyrus Lands Back in Hidden Hills". Dirt.com. Retrieved February 10, 2022. Haggard, Amanda (August 14, 2017). "Miley Cyrus buys Franklin home for $5.8M". NashvillePost.com. Retrieved February 10, 2022. "Miley Cyrus Reportedly Planning Naked Concert for Art (or Something)". Vanityfair.com. October 13, 2015. Retrieved December 24, 2015. "Miley Cyrus' Lakshmi Puja And The West's Obsession With India". February 7, 2017. Retrieved June 11, 2021. "Miley Cyrus Says Climate Change Has Affected Her Stance on Having Kids". ELLE. July 13, 2019. Retrieved January 27, 2024. Kaufman, Gil (August 14, 2020). "Miley Cyrus Talks Ditching Weed, Deep Meaning Behind 'Midnight Sky' and Whether She'll Ever Marry Again". Billboard. Retrieved January 27, 2024. Petrusich, Amanda (June 9, 2015). "Free to Be Miley". Paper Magazine. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Gordon, Naomi (August 28, 2015). "Miley Cyrus opens up on sexuality: "I'm pansexual - but I'm not in a relationship" - Celebrity News". Digital Spy. Retrieved September 5, 2015. "Miley Cyrus: I Told My Mom I Love Women When I Was 14". June 10, 2015. Retrieved June 10, 2015. Malec, Brett (May 6, 2015). "Miley Cyrus: I've Had Relationships That Weren't Straight, Heterosexual Ones". E! Online. Retrieved May 10, 2015. "Miley Cyrus Says She's Gender Fluid: 'It Has Nothing To Do With Any Parts of Me'". Billboard. June 16, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2015. "Miley dedicated 'My Heart Beats for Love' to all her gay fans". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "Miley Cyrus, 'I Wrote 'STAY' About Liam'". Ocean Up. June 16, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2013. Roberts, Scott (December 31, 2012). "Miley Cyrus: I love London because there are so many gay people". Pink News. Retrieved January 1, 2013. Ford, Rebecca (July 30, 2011). "Miley Cyrus Supports Gay Marriage With Tattoo". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 14, 2015. Mizoguchi, Karen (August 12, 2019). "Everything Miley Cyrus Has Said About Her Sexuality". People. Retrieved August 16, 2019. "The Happy Hippie Foundation". Happyhippies.org. Retrieved July 31, 2016. Starostinetskaya, Anna. "Miley Cyrus on Ditching Veganism: "I Think When You Become the Face of Something, It's a Lot of Pressure."". VegNews.com. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Leffler, Samantha (September 3, 2020). "Miley Cyrus Cried the 1st Time She Ate Fish After Her Vegan Diet". Us Weekly. Retrieved July 30, 2022. "Miley Cyrus is no longer vegan and people are fuming". amp.popbuzz.com. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Longmire, Becca (November 23, 2013). "Happy Birthday Miley Cyrus! Her 21st Year In Pictures: Liam Hemsworth Split, Nakedness, Twerking, More". Entertainment Wise. Archived from the original on April 9, 2014. Retrieved November 24, 2013. "Miley Cyrus: Alcohol More Dangerous Than Weed". ABC News. June 19, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2013. Eells, John (September 27, 2013). "Miley Cyrus on Why She Loves Weed, Went Wild at the VMAs and Much More". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 8, 2013. "Miley Cyrus smokes a joint on stage at MTV EMAs". CBS News. November 10, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2013. "My Oh Miley!". W Magazine. February 3, 2014. Archived from the original on November 10, 2016. Retrieved February 5, 2014. Romano, Nick (June 17, 2017). "Miley Cyrus Reveals Why She Quit Smoking Marijuana". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved August 16, 2019. Haller, Sonja (December 10, 2018). "Miley Cyrus smoking weed again: 'My mom got me back on it'". USA Today. Retrieved August 16, 2019. Duncan, Alasdair (February 15, 2019). "Miley Cyrus Gave Mark Ronson A Weed Bouquet For Valentine's Day". Pedestrian TV. Retrieved August 16, 2019. Adams, Benjamin M. (August 22, 2019). "Miley Cyrus and Other Stars Invest in Cannabis Company". Culture Magazine. Retrieved September 15, 2019. "Miley Cyrus' Mom Tish Opens Up About Singer's Sobriety: 'She's the Cleanest Person I Know'". People. Retrieved May 4, 2021. Dixon, Emily (October 22, 2019). "Miley Cyrus Said She's Been Sober For Four Months: "It's The Best I've Ever Felt"". Delish. Salaky, Kristin (September 3, 2020). "Miley Cyrus Said She Got Sober After Undergoing Vocal Surgery Last Year". Delish. "Miley Cyrus Says Vocal Surgery Got Her Sober". Billboard. September 3, 2020. "Miley Cyrus reveals how her sobriety journey influenced her new song". Good Morning America. "Joe Jonas Confirms Nick and Miley Dating". MTV News. Viacom. Retrieved April 29, 2014. "Miley Cyrus Says She and Nick Jonas Were 'In Love'". Fox News. August 7, 2008. Retrieved August 8, 2008. "Miley Cyrus 'Super Sorry' For Mocking Demi Lovato, Selena Gomez In Video". Mtv.com. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "Miley Cyrus, Justin Gaston post to Twitter about their breakup". Chicago Tribune. June 10, 2009. Retrieved May 30, 2019. Fisher, Luchina (March 26, 2012). "Liam Hemsworth: Five Things to Know About Miley's Man". ABC News. Retrieved May 2, 2014. Haylock, Zoe (August 13, 2019). "Miley Cyrus, Liam Hemsworth, and All the People Who Orbited Their Decade-Long Relationship". Vulture.com. Retrieved August 15, 2019. "Miley Cyrus engaged to 'Hunger Games' star". CNN. June 9, 2012. Retrieved April 7, 2014. Heller, Corinne (September 16, 2013). "Miley Cyrus, Liam Hemsworth end engagement (Confirmed)". On the Red Carpet. Retrieved April 7, 2014. Bailey, Alyssa (September 29, 2017). "All the Liam Hemsworth and Stella Maxwell References in Miley Cyrus's "She's Not Him" Lyrics". Elle. Retrieved May 30, 2019. Saad, Nardine (April 21, 2015). "Miley Cyrus, Patrick Schwarzenegger reportedly call it quits". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 10, 2015. Ledbetter, Carly (March 9, 2016). "Dolly Parton Confirms Miley Cyrus And Liam Hemsworth Are Back On". The Huffington Post. Retrieved May 28, 2016. B. Kile, Meredith (April 11, 2016). "Miley Cyrus and Liam Hemsworth Attend 'Huntsman' Premiere Together, Fans Freak Out". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved May 28, 2016. "Finally! Miley Cyrus addresses her engagement ring from Liam Hemsworth on 'Ellen'". USA Today. Retrieved October 27, 2016. "Miley Cyrus". Facebook. Miley Ray Cyrus [@MileyCyrus] (November 12, 2018). "Completely devestated by the fires affecting my community. I am one of the lucky ones. My animals and LOVE OF MY LIFE made it out safely & that's all that matters right now. My house no longer stands but the memories shared with family & friends stand strong. I am grateful for" (Tweet). Retrieved March 18, 2019 – via Twitter. "Miley Cyrus and Liam Hemsworth Are Married". The Hollywood Reporter. December 26, 2018. Bailey, Alyssa (February 21, 2019). "Miley Cyrus Explains Why She and Liam Hemsworth Got Married Even Though She Felt She 'Didn't Need' To". Elle. Retrieved May 30, 2019. Elizabeth, De (August 10, 2019). "Miley Cyrus and Liam Hemsworth Have Reportedly Split Up". Retrieved August 10, 2019. Nelson, Jeff (August 21, 2019). "Liam Hemsworth Files for Divorce from Miley Cyrus After 7 Months of Marriage". People. Retrieved August 21, 2019. "Miley Cyrus, Liam Hemsworth single again, divorce finalized". ABC News. Retrieved January 28, 2020. "Miley Cyrus Spotted Kissing Kaitlynn Carter in Italy". Entertainment Tonight. August 10, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Gonzales, Erica; Sanchez, Chelsey (September 26, 2019). "Miley Cyrus Is Reportedly "Looking Forward to Being Single"". Harper's BAZAAR. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Carter, Kaitlynn (November 4, 2019). "Kaitlynn Carter Opens Up About Her Summer of Self-Discovery". Elle. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Coy, Bronte (October 15, 2019). "Cody Simpson confirms relationship with 'passionate' Miley Cyrus". News.com.au. Weaver, Hilary (August 15, 2020). "Why Miley Cyrus and Cody Simpson's Relationship 'Fizzled Out'". Elle. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "New Miley Cyrus song declares 'I don't belong to anyone' just hours after Cody Simpson split". Yahoo! Entertainment. Yahoo. August 14, 2020. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020. Ryan, Patrick. "Miley Cyrus gets personal on new disco-inspired song 'Midnight Sky,' shares self-directed video". USA Today. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "She's Here: Miley Cyrus Drops 'Midnight Sky' Single & Video". Billboard. August 14, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Kaufman, Gil (August 19, 2008). "Mariah Carey, Beyonce, Fergie, Miley Cyrus, More Collaborate On Cancer Benefit Single". MTV News. Viacom. Retrieved August 20, 2008. Kaufman, Gil (April 3, 2009). "Miley Cyrus And Nick Jonas Hook Up For Charity". MTV News. Viacom. Retrieved November 11, 2009. "Haiti all-star charity single gets first airplay". BBC News. February 2, 2010. Retrieved February 2, 2010. Gundersen, Edna (February 14, 2010). "Quincy Jones, Lionel Richie pass 'We Are the World' baton". USA Today. Retrieved February 15, 2010. "The Walt Disney Company Is Presenting Miley Cyrus, Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato in a Special Concert to Benefit City of Hope on September 14". WDRB. August 8, 2008. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2014. "Miley Cyrus, Jesse McCartney And Demi Lovato To Perform At Concert For Hope Benefit". Access Online. October 16, 2009. Retrieved October 2, 2019. Muttoo, Ambika (October 11, 2012). "The Singer's Big Gown Showdown: Miley Cyrus Vs. Jordin Sparks Vs. Britney Spears". VH1. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. "Miley Cyrus, Demi Lovato and Jesse McCartney to perform at second annual Concert for Hope presented by Staples, Inc., October 25 at Nokia Theatre L.A. LIVE". City of Hope National Medical Center. September 22, 2009. Archived from the original on September 28, 2009. Retrieved October 8, 2009. "Miley Cyrus: Sharing her 'Sweet 16′ fun at Disneyland". Variety. October 6, 2008. Retrieved August 1, 2014. "Miley Cyrus To Give Her Time For Heroes". Look to the Stars. May 26, 2009. Retrieved July 31, 2014. "Miley Cyrus Donates Items For Ronald McDonald House Auction". Chattanoogan. July 21, 2009. Retrieved August 1, 2014. "Elton John AIDS Foundation Celebrity Supporters & Events". Look to the Stars. Retrieved July 31, 2014. "Entertainment Industry Foundation Celebrity Supporters & Events". Look to the Stars. Retrieved July 31, 2014. "Habitat For Humanity Celebrity Supporters & Events". Look to the Stars. Retrieved July 31, 2014. "Muhammad Ali Parkinson Center Celebrity Supporters & Events". Look to the Stars. Retrieved July 31, 2014. "United Service Organization Celebrity Supporters & Events". Look to the Stars. Retrieved July 31, 2014. Walker, Caroline (July 5, 2011). "Miley Cyrus Says 'Get Your Good On,' Encourages Youth Volunteerism". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on August 9, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2014. "Mileymandy - YouTube". YouTube. "TWLOHA". YouTube. @TWLOHA (November 4, 2010). "Miley Cyrus asks her fans to help TWLOHA win $1 million for suicide prevention" (Tweet). Retrieved July 18, 2022 – via Twitter. "Miley Cyrus Supports to Write Love on Her Arms". January 22, 2010. "MILEY CYRUS TEACHES JOAQUIN PHOENIX & LIV TYLER How to Vote for TWLOHA and Suicide Prevention". YouTube. "Miley Cyrus Teaches Joaquin Phoenix and Liv Tyler How To Support TWLOHA.com". Look to the Stars. Retrieved July 2, 2022. Martin, Lara (February 1, 2010). "Miley Cyrus auctions Grammy dress for Haiti". Digital Spy. Retrieved July 31, 2014. "Miley Cyrus Makes Memorable Day for 29 Wish Kids for World Wish Day® 2010". YouTube. "Miley Cyrus Performs "The Climb" at Make-A-Wish® Celebration for World Wish Day". YouTube. "MIley Cyrus Talks About Being a Make-A-Wish® Wish Granter". YouTube. "Kids Wish Network and Miley Cyrus Grant Wish to Ailing Boy with Spina Bifida". Kids Wish Network. January 25, 2011. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2014. "Miley Cyrus PSA: Japan Relief". Red Cross. April 14, 2014. Retrieved August 1, 2014. Wenn (February 20, 2011). "Miley Cyrus – Cyrus Honoured With Youth Award". Contactmusic. Retrieved May 21, 2014. Lee, Joyce (February 22, 2011). "Miley Cyrus honored with youth leadership award". CBS News. Retrieved May 21, 2014. "Miley Cyrus J P HRO Super Give Away [Help Haiti Home]". YouTube. December 17, 2011. Archived from the original on December 13, 2021. Retrieved July 31, 2014. DelliCarpini, Gregory Jr. (December 29, 2011). "Miley Cyrus Designs T-Shirt With Brother". Billboard. Retrieved August 1, 2014. Almond, Kyle (December 12, 2011). "An awards show unlike any other". CNN. Retrieved August 1, 2014. "NMiley Cyrus featuring Johnzo West - 'You're Gonna Make Me Lonesome When You Go'". Amnesty International. April 30, 2015. Retrieved August 7, 2016. Exton, Emily (September 19, 2012). "Miley Cyrus and Her New Hair Encourage You to Vote in This Year's Election". Popdust. Retrieved July 11, 2014. Wenn (November 25, 2012). "Miley Cyrus – Miley Cyrus Thanks Fans For Birthday Fundraising". Contactmusic. Retrieved May 21, 2014. Blay, Zeba (November 26, 2012). "Miley Cyrus thanks fans for birthday fundraising". Digital Spy. Retrieved May 21, 2014. "Miley Cyrus teams up with NOH8 and takes a stand for Equality!". NOH8 Campaign. December 29, 2011. Retrieved July 11, 2014. Zellner, Maggie (July 2011). "Celebs Say "Love Is Louder..."". Seventeen. Retrieved July 11, 2014. Zellner, Maggie (July 2011). "Love is Louder with Demi Lovato". Seventeen. Retrieved July 11, 2014. Harding, Scharon (December 26, 2013). "Top 20 Celebrities Giving to Charity: Taylor Swift, Justin Bieber, and Miley Cyrus Head List". Latin Post. Retrieved May 20, 2014. Ng, Philiana (April 4, 2013). "Justin Bieber, Miley Cyrus & Pitbull Team For Educational TV Special". Billboard. Retrieved May 20, 2014. "Miss Universe will meet Barack Obama". Miss Universe USA. July 26, 2014. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2014. Murray, Rheana (August 25, 2014). "Entertainment Meet the Homeless Man Who Accepted Miley Cyrus' VMA Award". ABC News. Retrieved August 25, 2014. Barnes, Brooks (August 25, 2014). "VMAs 2014: Miley Cyrus Causes a Stir Again, This Time by Staying in Her Seat". The New York Times. Retrieved December 24, 2015. "Miley Cyrus collaborates with a cosmetic brand to raise money for HIV charity". India TV. Retrieved November 24, 2020. Smirke, Richard (June 4, 2017). "Bravery, Resilience Shine as Ariana Grande Leads All-Star Benefit Concert for Victims of Manchester Bombing". Billboard. "Miley Cyrus Moved to Tears Over Hurricane Harvey and Donates $500,000 to Flood Relief Efforts". E!. Retrieved November 24, 2020. Seemayer, Zach (September 9, 2019). "Dua Lipa on Why It Was So Special to Have Miley Cyrus Perform at Her Sunny Hill Festival in Kosovo (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved April 6, 2020. "Miley Cyrus Makes a Fan's Dream Come True!". YouTube. "Miley Cyrus and Cody Simpson Deliver Tacos to Healthcare Workers amid Coronavirus Pandemic". People. Retrieved November 24, 2020. Koh, Lydia (June 15, 2020). "Miley Cyrus and Cody Simpson take a break from Black Lives Matter protests". Theindependent.sg. Retrieved December 5, 2020. Setoodeh, Ramin (October 11, 2016). "Miley Cyrus Stands Up for Homeless Youth". Retrieved December 7, 2018. "Miley Cyrus Instagram Instapride". Time. Retrieved October 17, 2018. "Miley Cyrus launches Instapride campaign to honor transgender people". Rolling Stone. June 15, 2015. Retrieved October 17, 2018. "Malibu Foundation". Malibufoundation.gvng.org. Archived from the original on January 12, 2019. Retrieved January 12, 2019. "Thank You Miley And Liam!". Malibufoundation.gvng.org. November 13, 2018. Archived from the original on March 27, 2020. Retrieved January 12, 2019. Bueno, Antoinette (November 13, 2018). "Miley Cyrus and Liam Hemsworth Donate $500K to Malibu Relief After Losing Home to Woolsey Fire". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved January 12, 2019. Nicholson, Rebecca (June 10, 2015). "Canny and confrontational, Miley Cyrus is this generation's Madonna". The Guardian. Retrieved February 14, 2022. Steinberg, Shirley R. (May 4, 2018). Kinderculture: The Corporate Construction of Childhood. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-429-96364-3. "Miley Cyrus: Teen Queen". Parade. April 6, 2009. Retrieved February 16, 2021. "From Teen Queen to Leading Lady: Miley Cyrus' Sizzlin' Style Through the Years!". Entertainment Tonight. June 10, 2013. Archived from the original on June 10, 2013. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "Miley Cyrus Is Dracula's Daughter - Celebrity Gossip, News & Photos, Movie Reviews, Competitions - Entertainmentwise". June 19, 2013. Archived from the original on June 19, 2013. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Bickford, Tyler (2015). "Tween Intimacy and the Problem of Public Life in Children's Media: "Having It All" on the Disney Channel's "Hannah Montana"". Women's Studies Quarterly. 43 (1/2): 66–82. ISSN 0732-1562. JSTOR 43958468. Blue, Morgan Genevieve (September 1, 2013). "The Best of Both Worlds?". Feminist Media Studies. 13 (4): 660–675. doi:10.1080/14680777.2012.724024. ISSN 1468-0777. S2CID 147354770. McLean, Craig. "Why Miley Cyrus is the world's biggest ever teenage star". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "Springsteen, Chesney Rule Billboard Touring Awards". Billboard. November 20, 2008. Retrieved February 14, 2022. Cohen, Jonathan (March 4, 2008). "'Hannah Montana' Tour Heading To CD/DVD". Billboard. Retrieved February 14, 2022. Billboard. June 27, 2009. Greene, Andy (May 11, 2012). "The Top 25 Teen Idol Breakout Moments". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 14, 2022. "Puranoticia | Paul McCartney compara a Miley Cyrus y Justin Bieber con los Beatles". www.puranoticia.cl. Retrieved February 14, 2022. "Compara Paul McCartney a Cyrus y Bieber con The Beatles". La Razón. Retrieved February 14, 2022. Abebe, Nitsuh (May 2, 2011). "Why Miley Cyrus's 'Party in the U.S.A.' Became the Osama Bin Laden Death Anthem - Slideshow". Vulture. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "Miley Cyrus Has a 'Party in the U.S.A' in Patriotic Gear for Fourth of July". People. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Hernandez, Brian Anthony (July 7, 2013). "Petition Wants Miley's 'Party in the U.S.A.' to be New National Anthem". Mashable. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "'Party in the USA': People in America take to streets dancing to celebrate Joe Biden's big victory". www.timesnownews.com. November 8, 2020. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Spanos, Brittany (May 8, 2017). "Miley Cyrus' 10 Biggest Scandals". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Woods, Mickey (October 8, 2013). "6 Reasons We Love Miley Cyrus' New Album Bangerz". Glamour. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "The 100 Greatest Albums of the 2010s: Staff Picks". Billboard. November 19, 2019. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "Songs That Defined the Decade: Miley Cyrus' 'We Can't Stop'". Billboard. November 21, 2019. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Ryan, Patrick. "Thanks to Miley, hitmaker Mike Will made it". USA Today. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Ozzi, Dan (September 19, 2013). "Miley Cyrus is Punk AF". Vice. Retrieved June 11, 2021. "Best Artists Of 2013". MTV News. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "Top 20 Music Moments of 2013". Billboard. December 19, 2012. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "20 Best Songs of 2013: Critics' Picks". Billboard. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "Greatest of All Time Billboard 200 Artists". Billboard. November 12, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2022. Porter, Zachariah (February 26, 2019). "Miley Cyrus Is a Queer Superhero: 8 Times She Showed Love to the LGBTQ Community". Billboard. Retrieved February 14, 2022. "Lil Nas X Says Miley Cyrus Doesn't 'Even Realize How Much of a Legend' She Is: 'I Really Admire Her'". People. Archived from the original on September 25, 2021. Retrieved September 23, 2021. Barlow, Eve (May 4, 2018). "Troye Sivan". Wonderland. Retrieved April 18, 2023. "Lea Michele Q&A: Talks 'Difficult' Cory Song, Finding Her Voice and Life After 'Glee'". Billboard. March 3, 2014. Cyrus, Miley & Liftin, Hilary (2009). Miles to Go. New York: Disney-Hyperion Books. ISBN 978-1-4231-1992-0. OCLC 244417637. Miles to Go at Google Books. Miley Cyrus at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Miley Cyrus at Amazon Music Miley Cyrus at Curlie Miley Cyrus at IMDb