This is a complete list of all cities and towns in Bulgaria sorted by population. Province capitals are shown in bold. Primary sources are the National Statistical Institute (NSI) and the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences. The largest city is Sofia with about 1.4 million inhabitants and the smallest is Melnik with about 300. Smallest towns are not necessarily larger than all villages as many villages are more populous than many towns, compare Lozen, a large village with more than 6,000 inhabitants. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • Blagoevgrad Burgas Dobrich Gabrovo Haskovo Kardzhali Kyustendil Lovech Montana Pazardzhik Pernik Pleven Plovdiv Razgrad Ruse Shumen Silistra Sliven Smolyan Sofia-grad Sofia Stara Zagora Targovishte Varna Veliko Tarnovo Vidin Vratsa Yambol Black Sea Danube North Macedonia Greece Romania Serbia Turkey Europe portal European Union portal Bulgaria portal List of villages in Bulgaria Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS) of Bulgaria List of cities in the European Union by population within city limits List of European cities by population within city limits "ПРЕБРОЯВАНЕ 2011" (PDF). Nsi.bg (in Bulgarian). Retrieved 17 October 2017. "УРБАНИЗАЦИЯТА В БЪЛГАРИЯ ОТ ОСВОБОЖДЕНИЕТО ДО КРАЯ НА ВТОРАТА СВЕТОВНА ВОЙНА" [Urbanization In Bulgaria from the Liberation to the End of World War II] (PDF). Prokarstterra.bas.bg (in Bulgarian). Retrieved 17 October 2017. "България / Bălgarija". Pop-stat.mashke.org (in Bulgarian). Retrieved 17 October 2017. "6.1.4. Population by towns and sex – Table data". Bulgarian National Statistical Institute. 13 November 2010. Archived from the original on 13 November 2010. Retrieved 17 October 2017. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cities in Bulgaria. Map main cities in Bulgaria at Visitmybulgaria.com Map of Bulgarian towns at BGMaps.com Map of Bulgarian towns at the World Gazetteer website at archive.today (archived 2012-12-10) Maps of Bulgarian towns at Domino.bg Archived 2008-01-17 at the Wayback Machine Veliko Tarnovo of Bulgaria Map of Bulgaria