Sarajevo Banja Luka Tuzla Zenica Bijeljina Mostar Prijedor Doboj Cazin Istočno Sarajevo Zvornik Živinice Bihać Gradiška Gračanica Visoko Srebrenik Gradačac Livno Laktaši Trebinje Široki Brijeg Ljubuški Čapljina Goražde Derventa Lukavac Zavidovići Konjic Bosanska Krupa Orašje Stolac This is a list of cities and towns with over 10,000 inhabitants (or lower if the municipality has over 20,000 inhabitants) in Bosnia and Herzegovina. For the full list of populated places, see List of populated places in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Apart from entities, cantons and municipalities, Bosnia and Herzegovina also has officially designated cities. Official cities have their own mayor and city council, which is a big difference to the municipalities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which have a municipal council and mayor. Powers of city councils of official cities are between the government of municipalities and government cantons in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina or a government entity in Republika Srpska. There are thirty two official cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina (as of 2022): Banja Luka Bijeljina Bihać Bosanska Krupa Cazin Čapljina Derventa Doboj Goražde Gračanica Gradačac Gradiška Istočno Sarajevo Konjic Laktaši Livno Lukavac Ljubuški Mostar Orašje Prijedor Sarajevo Srebrenik Stolac Široki Brijeg Trebinje Tuzla Visoko Zavidovići Zenica Zvornik Živinice The list includes only the 55 cities and towns whose administrative area has a population greater than 20,000. Istočno Sarajevo, with a population of 61,516 in its administrative area, is not included, since it is a city only in administrative sense and does not have a city proper. "¤" indicates an official city. List of populated places in Bosnia and Herzegovina List of settlements in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Municipalities of Bosnia and Herzegovina Municipalities of Republika Srpska (in Bosnian) "Prostorni plan Kantona Sarajevo za period od 2003. do 2023. godine" Archived 2018-09-06 at the Wayback Machine Službeni glasnik Republike Srpske br. 70/12 "Census of Population, Households and Dwellings in Bosnia and Herzegovina" (PDF). 2019. Retrieved September 15, 2020. "Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2013 census". Retrieved September 15, 2020. Population of municipalities of Centar, Novi Grad, Novo Sarajevo and Stari Grad which form the City of Sarajevo In 1991, the City of Sarajevo consisted of municipalities of Centar, Novi Grad, Novo Sarajevo, Stari Grad, Ilidža, Vogošća, Hadžići, Ilijaš, Pale and Trnovo. This number of inhabitants includes only the current municipalities. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2013 final results, map 2013 Census final results