Michael Schumacher (German: [ˈmɪçaːʔeːl ˈʃuːmaxɐ] ; born 3 January 1969) is a German former racing driver who competed in Formula One for Jordan, Benetton, Ferrari, and Mercedes. Schumacher has a joint-record seven World Drivers' Championship titles (tied with Lewis Hamilton); at the time of his retirement from the sport in 2012, he also held the records for the most wins (91), pole positions (68), and podium finishes (155)—which have since been broken by Hamilton—while he maintains the record for consecutive Drivers' Championships and number of total fastest laps (77), among others. Born to working-class parents, Schumacher started his racing career in karting. He won his first karting championship aged six in a kart built from discarded parts. After having enjoyed success in karting—such as winning the 1987 European karting championship—and in several single-seater series, Schumacher made a one-off Formula One appearance with Jordan at the Belgian Grand Prix. He was signed by Benetton for the rest of the 1991 season, winning his first and second drivers' titles consecutively in 1994 and 1995 with the team. Schumacher moved to the struggling Ferrari team in 1996. During his first few years with the team, Schumacher lost out on the title in the final race of the season in 1997 and 1998, and suffered a broken leg from a brake failure in 1999. He and Ferrari won five consecutive titles from 2000 to 2004, including unprecedented sixth and seventh titles, while breaking several records. After finishing third in 2005 and second in 2006, Schumacher retired from the sport, although he later made a brief return with Mercedes from 2010 to 2012. Schumacher was noted for pushing his car to the very limit for sustained periods during races, a pioneering fitness regimen, and ability to galvanise teams around him. He and his younger brother Ralf are the only siblings to win races in Formula One and the first siblings to finish first and second in the same race, a feat they repeated in four subsequent races. Schumacher was twice involved in collisions in the final race of a season that decided the title: first with Damon Hill at the 1994 Australian Grand Prix, and later with Jacques Villeneuve at the 1997 European Grand Prix. Appointed UNESCO Champion for Sport in 2002, Schumacher has been involved in humanitarian projects and has donated tens of millions of dollars to charity. In December 2013, Schumacher suffered a severe brain injury in a skiing accident. He was placed in a medically induced coma until June 2014. He left the hospital in Grenoble for further rehabilitation at the Lausanne University Hospital, before being relocated to his home to receive medical treatment and rehabilitation privately in September 2014. Michael Schumacher was born in the West German town of Hürth, North Rhine-Westphalia, on 3 January 1969, to working-class parents Rolf—a bricklayer who later ran the local kart track—and Elisabeth Schumacher (1948–2003), who operated the track's canteen. When Schumacher was four, his father modified his pedal kart by adding a small motorcycle engine. After he crashed it into a lamp post in Kerpen, his parents took him to the karting track at Kerpen-Horrem, where he became the youngest member of the karting club. His father built him a kart from discarded parts; at the age of six, Schumacher won his first club championship. To support his racing, Schumacher's father took on a second job renting and repairing karts, while his mother worked at the track's canteen. Nevertheless, when Schumacher needed a new engine costing 800 DM, his parents were unable to afford it; he was able to continue racing with support from local businessmen. Regulations in Germany require a driver to be at least 14 years old to obtain a kart license. To get around this, Schumacher obtained a license in Luxembourg at the age of 12. In 1983, he obtained his German license, a year after he won the German Junior Kart Championship. Schumacher joined Eurokart dealer Adolf Neubert in 1985, and by 1987 was the German and European kart champion, then he quit school and began working as a mechanic. In 1988, he made his first step into single-seat car racing by participating in the German Formula Ford and Formula König series, winning the latter. In 1989, Schumacher signed with Willi Weber's WTS Formula Three team. Funded by Weber, he competed in the German Formula Three Championship, winning the 1990 German Formula Three Championship. He also won the 1990 Macau Grand Prix under controversial circumstances. He placed second behind Mika Häkkinen in the first heat, three seconds behind. At the start of the second heat, he overtook Häkkinen, who only had to finish within three seconds of Schumacher to clinch the overall win. In the closing laps, Schumacher made a mistake, allowing Häkkinen to attempt to overtake. Schumacher changed his line immediately before Häkkinen did the same as the latter moved to overtake, and Häkkinen crashed into the back of Schumacher's car. While Häkkinen's race was ended, Schumacher drove to victory without a rear wing. Schumacher gave the prize money from winning the race to his family as they had debts. During 1990, along with his Formula Three rivals Heinz-Harald Frentzen and Karl Wendlinger, Schumacher joined the Mercedes-Benz junior racing programme in the World Sportscar Championship. This was unusual for a young driver, as most of Schumacher's contemporaries competed in Formula 3000 on the way to Formula One. Weber advised Schumacher that being exposed to professional press conferences and driving powerful cars in long-distance races would help his career. In the 1990 World Sportscar Championship season, Schumacher won the season finale at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez in a Sauber–Mercedes C11, and finished fifth in the Drivers' Championship despite only driving in three of the nine races. He continued with the team in the 1991 World Sportscar Championship season, winning again at the final race of the season at Autopolis in Japan with a Sauber–Mercedes-Benz C291, leading to a ninth-place finish in the Drivers' Championship. He also competed at the 1991 24 Hours of Le Mans, finishing fifth in a car shared with Wendlinger and Fritz Kreutzpointner. He further competed in one race in the 1991 Japanese Formula 3000 Championship, finishing second. During the 1991 430 km of Nürburgring, Schumacher was involved in an incident with Derek Warwick. While trying to set his flying lap in qualifying, Schumacher encountered Warwick's Jaguar XJR-14 on a slow lap resulting in lost time for Schumacher. As retaliation for Warwick being in his way, Schumacher swerved his Sauber into Warwick's car, hitting the Jaguar's nose and front wheel. Enraged by Schumacher's attitude, Warwick drove to the pits and chased Schumacher on foot. He eventually caught up with Schumacher, and it took intervention from several mechanics and Schumacher's teammate Jochen Mass to prevent Warwick physically assaulting Schumacher. "No one will ever be greater than Schumi. Michael has shaped a generation like no other, he is iconic." Toto Wolff about Schumacher Schumacher was noted throughout his career for his speed and racecraft, and his ability to produce fast laps at crucial moments in a race and to push his car to the very limit for sustained periods. He was also noted for his work ethic, pioneering fitness regimen, and ability to galvanise teams around him. In 2004, Slate magazine described Schumacher as "the ultimate driving machine" and "the most dominant athlete in the world" due to him having become "quicker, stronger, and fitter than the competition by outworking them in the weight room". The magazine also stated that Schumacher changed the sport as he set a new benchmark for other drivers and built the team and technologies around him. Schumacher exercised four hours a day, mostly to strengthen his neck muscles to better withstand G-forces during races. After his gym session, he would often head to the race track for testing. In 2003, Deutsche Welle highlighted Schumacher's "natural talent" for racing and his "discipline and leadership". In 2023, former Formula One rival Giancarlo Fisichella observed that Schumacher "did not even seem to have sweated" during races, adding that Schumacher is the greatest Formula One driver of all time and "rewrote the history of Formula One". In 2003, F1 Racing magazine analysed Schumacher's driving style using telemetry data. It was observed that Schumacher was "very sensitively and flexibly" on the gas and brakes. Compared with his Ferrari teammate Rubens Barrichello, who often either braked or accelerated in a corner, Schumacher usually braked later into a corner and stabilised his car by accelerating slightly, often using both the brake and accelerator pedals at the same time. Exiting a corner, Schumacher accelerated considerably and balanced his car by braking lightly. Martin Brundle talked about being in awe upon seeing Schumacher's telemetry showing he took turn one on full throttle at the Suzuka circuit. With his driving style, Schumacher also went 25 km/h faster through the hairpin corner of Suzuka compared to Barrichello, who lost 0.3 seconds to Schumacher in this corner. It was also observed that when needed, such as when the brakes started to overheat, Schumacher adapted his driving style to protect the brakes. Motor Sport author Christopher Hilton observed in 2003 that a "measure of a driver's capabilities is his performance in wet races, because the most delicate car control and sensitivity are needed", and commented that, like other great drivers, Schumacher's record in wet conditions shows very few mistakes; up to the end of 2003, Schumacher won 17 of the 30 races in wet conditions he contested. Some of Schumacher's best performances occurred in such conditions, earning him the nicknames Regenkönig ("Rain King"), or Regenmeister ("Rain Master"), even in the non-German-language media. He is further known as "the Red Baron" because of his red Ferrari and in reference to the German Manfred von Richthofen, the famous flying ace of the First World War. Schumacher's nicknames also include "Schumi", "Schuey", and "Schu". Schumacher has often been credited with popularising Formula One worldwide, especially in Germany, where it was formerly considered a fringe sport. In a 2006 FIA survey, he was voted the most popular driver of the season among Formula One fans. Throughout his career, Schumacher was subject to anti-German prejudices, especially from the British media. About his collision with Schumacher in 1994, British driver Damon Hill wrote: "There are two things that set Michael apart from the rest of the drivers in Formula One − his sheer talent and his attitude. I am full of admiration for the former, but the latter leaves me cold." In addition to Hill, Schumacher also had rivalries with Mika Häkkinen, whom he beat for his first World Championship at Ferrari and the team's first Drivers' Championship since the 1979 season, and Fernando Alonso, who ended Schumacher's five-consecutive titles in the 2000s. Despite only facing him during Schumacher's brief comeback in the 2010s, Lewis Hamilton is also seen a rival due to their similar achievements and driving styles, and cited him as inspiration. When Schumacher first retired in 2006, three of the top ten drivers in that year's Drivers' standings were German, more than any other nationality. Younger German drivers, such as Sebastian Vettel, felt Schumacher was key in their becoming Formula One drivers. In 2020, Vettel named Schumacher the greatest Formula One driver of all time. During a large part of his Formula One career, Schumacher was the president of the Grand Prix Drivers' Association, a representative body originally set up in 1961 that had been disbanded in 1982 and Schumacher had helped to relaunch in 1994. In 2006, Formula One rival David Coulthard hailed Schumacher as the greatest all-round racing driver in the history of the sport, while three-time World Champion Niki Lauda stated: "He is the greatest. Nobody will ever beat him, as long as we are alive." In 2020, Schumacher was voted the most influential person in Formula One history. Schumacher made his Formula One debut with the Irish Jordan-Ford team at the Belgian Grand Prix, driving car number 32 as a replacement for the imprisoned Bertrand Gachot. Schumacher, still a contracted Mercedes driver, was signed by Eddie Jordan after Mercedes paid Jordan $150,000 for his debut. The week before the race, Schumacher impressed Jordan designer Gary Anderson and team manager Trevor Foster during a test drive at the Silverstone circuit. Schumacher's manager Weber assured Jordan that Schumacher knew the challenging Spa-Francorchamps circuit well, although in fact he had only seen it as a spectator. During the race weekend, teammate Andrea de Cesaris was meant to show Schumacher the circuit but was held up with contract negotiations. Schumacher then learned the track on his own, by cycling around the track on a fold-up bike he brought with him. In his debut, Schumacher impressed the paddock by qualifying seventh; he did so in a midfield car, the Jordan 191, which he drove half a day of testing and at a track he had never raced at. This also matched the team's season-best grid position, and Schumacher outqualified veteran de Cesaris. Motor Sport journalist Joe Saward reported that, after qualifying, "clumps of German journalists were talking about 'the best talent since Stefan Bellof'". Schumacher retired on the first lap of the race with clutch problems. Following his Belgian Grand Prix debut, despite an agreement in principle between Jordan and Schumacher's Mercedes management that would see the German race for the Irish team for the remainder of the season, Schumacher was engaged by Benetton-Ford for the next race. Jordan applied for an injunction in the British courts to prevent Schumacher driving for Benetton but lost the case as they had not yet signed a final contract. Schumacher finished the 1991 season with four points out of six races. His best finish was fifth in his second race, the Italian Grand Prix, in which he finished ahead of his teammate and three-time World Champion Nelson Piquet. He also outqualified Piquet four times out of five in the season run-in, and scored only half a point less than him in the time they were together. At the start of the 1992 season the Sauber team, planning their Formula One debut with Mercedes backing for the following year, invoked a clause in Schumacher's contract that stated that if Mercedes entered Formula One, Schumacher would drive for them. It was eventually agreed that Schumacher would stay with Benetton; Peter Sauber stated that "[Schumacher] didn't want to drive for us. Why would I have forced him?" The year was dominated by the Williams FW14B of Nigel Mansell and Riccardo Patrese, featuring powerful Renault engines, semi-automatic gearboxes, and active suspension to control the car's ride height. In the conventional Benetton B192, Schumacher took his place on the podium for the first time, finishing third in the Mexican Grand Prix. Through what has been described as a tactical masterstroke, he went on to take his first victory at the Belgian Grand Prix, in a wet race at the Spa-Francorchamps circuit, which by 2003 he would call "far and away my favourite track". That also marked as the last Formula One car to win a Grand Prix while sporting a H-pattern manual gearbox. From the 1992 Portuguese Grand Prix to the 1998 Monaco Grand Prix, Schumacher was not beaten by his teammate when both cars finished. 1992 was also the first of many times that Schumacher beat his teammate through a full season, and Martin Brundle was fired as a result. Benetton team boss Flavio Briatore later regretted this decision, saying that he had underestimated the ability of both his drivers. Schumacher finished third in the Drivers' Championship in 1992 with 53 points, three points behind runner-up Patrese and three in front of the Brazilian Ayrton Senna. According to Jo Ramírez, a close friend of Senna, the Brazilian considered Schumacher "the next big threat, way ahead of all the other drivers around at the time". The Williams FW15C of Damon Hill and Alain Prost dominated the 1993 season as well. Benetton introduced their own active suspension and traction control early in the season, last of the frontrunning teams to do so. Schumacher won one race, the Portuguese Grand Prix where he beat Prost, and had nine podium finishes; he retired in seven of the other 16 races. He finished the season in fourth, with 52 points, beating Patrese as teammate, so much so that Briatore and his team thought that Patrese was washed up and that they had no problem with their car. Schumacher won his first Drivers' Championship in 1994. Driving the Benetton B194, which has been called the worst car to have won a Formula One World Championship and was difficult to drive, so much so that Schumacher had three different teammates (JJ Lehto, Jos Verstappen, and Johnny Herbert) due to crashes, Schumacher won the first four races and finished the season with eight wins. He won six of the first seven races, including the Brazilian Grand Prix in which he lapped the entire field, and was leading the Spanish Grand Prix, before a gearbox failure left him stuck in fifth gear for most of the race. Schumacher made two pit stops without stalling and finished the race in second place. Benetton boss Flavio Briatore stated that Schumacher's drive was one of the best he had ever seen. The 1994 season was marred by the death of Ayrton Senna, which was witnessed by Schumacher who was directly behind Senna, and that of Roland Ratzenberger during the San Marino Grand Prix; there were also allegations of cheating during the 1994 Formula One season involving several teams, most particularly Schumacher's Benetton, having allegedly broken the sport's technical regulations. Following the San Marino Grand Prix, the Benetton, Ferrari, and McLaren teams were investigated on suspicion of breaking the FIA-imposed ban on electronic aids. Benetton and McLaren initially refused to hand over their source code for investigation. When they did so, the FIA discovered hidden functionality in both teams' software but no evidence that it had been used in a race. Both teams were fined $100,000 for their initial refusal to cooperate. The McLaren software, which was a gearbox program that allowed automatic shifts, was deemed legal. By contrast, the Benetton software was deemed to be a form of launch control that would have allowed Schumacher to make perfect starts, which was explicitly outlawed by the regulations; Benetton and Willem Toet, a Formula One aerodynamicist for over thirty years who worked at Benetton until 1994, stated that traction control was legally achieved through rotational inertia. There was no evidence to suggest the software was used. At the British Grand Prix, Schumacher was penalised for overtaking Hill on the formation lap. He and Benetton then ignored the penalty and the subsequent black flag, which indicates that the driver must immediately return to the pits, for which he was disqualified and later given a two-race ban. Benetton blamed the incident on a communication error between the stewards and the team. Schumacher was also disqualified after winning the Belgian Grand Prix, after his car was found to have illegal wear on its skid block, a measure used after the accidents at Imola to limit downforce and hence cornering speed. Benetton protested that the skid block had been damaged when Schumacher spun over a kerb; the FIA rejected their appeal because of the pattern of wear and damage visible on the block. The two-race ban punishment was seen by many observers as petty and insignificant, and that it was a result of Benetton feud with the FIA, with Schumacher being a victim and the FIA trying to deny him his first World Championship. These incidents helped Damon Hill close the points gap, and Schumacher led by a single point going into the final race at the Australian Grand Prix. On lap 36, Schumacher hit the guardrail on the outside of the track while leading. Hill attempted to pass but as Schumacher's car returned to the track there was a collision on the corner causing them both to retire. As a result, Schumacher won the Drivers' Championship, the first German to do so—Jochen Rindt (the only posthumous Drivers' Champion) was German but raced under the Austrian flag, and whose domination in 1970 was later equalled by Schumacher. The race stewards judged it as a racing accident and took no action against either driver. Although the Drivers' Championship had been decided in a similar manner in 1989 and 1990, public opinion was divided over the incident, and Schumacher was vilified in the British media. At the FIA conference after the race, Schumacher dedicated his title to Senna. In 1995, Schumacher successfully defended his title with Benetton, which now had the same Renault engine as Williams; according to Motor Sport author Marcus Simmons, Benetton had the better team, while Williams had the superior car. Schumacher accumulated 33 more points than second-placed Hill. With Herbert as teammate, he took Benetton to its first Constructors' Championship, breaking the dominance of McLaren and Williams, and became the youngest two-time World Champion in Formula One history. The season was marred by several collisions with Hill, in particular an overtaking manoeuvre by Hill took them both out of the British Grand Prix on lap 45, and again on lap 23 of the Italian Grand Prix; it also saw one of his career's best ovetakes, with the one over Jean Alesi giving him the win at the European Grand Prix, after he reduced the half a minute gap in the final dozen laps. Schumacher won 9 of the 17 races, including the French Grand Prix, and finished on the podium 11 times. It was only once that he qualify worse than fourth; at the Belgian Grand Prix, he qualified 16th but nevertheless went on to win the wet-dry race, finishing 16 seconds ahead of Hill, with whom he had ferocious wheel-to-wheel racing and involved some crucial strategic calls. His bad qualifying was a result of a crash he had in the final free practice, and by the time his car was rebuilt, it had started to rain; this ended his 56-race streak of outqualifiyng his teammates that started in 1992, after he missed a gear in qualifying in Adelaide in 1991 and was outqualified by Nelson Piquet. In 1996, Schumacher joined Ferrari, a team that had last won the Drivers' Championship in 1979 and the Constructors' Championship in 1983, for a salary of $60 million over two years. He left Benetton a year before his contract with them expired; he later cited the team's damaging actions in 1994 as his reason for opting out of his deal. A year later, Schumacher lured Benetton employees Rory Byrne (designer) and Ross Brawn (technical director) to Ferrari. Ferrari had previously come close to the championship in 1982 and 1990. The team had suffered a disastrous downturn in the early 1990s, partially as its famous V12 engine was no longer competitive against the smaller, lighter, and more fuel-efficient V10s of its competitors. Various drivers, notably Alain Prost, had given the vehicles disparaging labels, such as "truck", "pig", and "accident waiting to happen". Furthermore, the poor performance of the Ferrari pit crews was considered a running joke. At the end of 1995, although the team had improved into a solid competitor, it was still considered inferior to front-running teams like Benetton and Williams. Schumacher declared the Ferrari F310 good enough to win a championship, although afterwards his teammate Eddie Irvine labelled the F310 "an awful car", a "piece of junk", and "almost undriveable", while designer John Barnard admitted that the car "wasn't very good". Irvine also later commented: "The '96 [Ferrari] car was a disaster and was nearly undriveable. Only someone of Michael Schumacher's ability − and maybe Senna – could have driven it." During winter testing, Schumacher first drove a Ferrari, their 1995 Ferrari 412 T2, and was two seconds faster than former regulars Jean Alesi and Gerhard Berger had been. Alesi and Berger were allowed to drive Schumacher's Benetton B195 with which he won the World Championship in 1995, and they could not believe how Schumacher had won with it, calling it "the ugly ducking" for being so ugly to drive and having many crashes. In a 1999 interview with his 1994 and 1995 World Championship rival Damon Hill, Schumacher recalled: "You remember when I left Benetton, and [Jean] Alesi and [Gerhard] Berger took their first steps in that Benetton? You remember how many crashes they had? ... I mean, that car was really unbelievable. Really difficult to drive. It was so edgy. But it was fast when you just drove it exactly on that edge. Now, though, there have been a lot of aerodynamic improvements to the cars and so the cars I have driven have been a lot more stable. And that applies to most of the cars today." Schumacher, Brawn, Byrne, and Jean Todt have been credited as turning the struggling team into the most successful team in Formula One history, Schumacher became the byword for Formula One and motorsports in general. Three-time World Champion Jackie Stewart believed the transformation of the Ferrari team was Schumacher's greatest feat. At Ferrari, Schumacher scored 72 Grand Prix wins and won five consecutive Drivers' titles from 2000 to 2004. As of 2022, only Lewis Hamilton and Mercedes, both of whom were Schumacher's successor and his career last team, were considered in the same ballpark in terms of dominance and sustained success. According to Brawn, had Schumacher not retired in 2012 and not suffered a skii injury in 2013, he would have had a shot at winning his eight World Championship in 2014. In 2023, Williams team principal James Vowles, who was Mercedes chief strategist during Schumacher's time at the team between 2010 and 2012 and was instrumental in the team's success in the mid-to-late 2010s, said that Schumacher brought Mercedes together. Vowles added: "[Schumacher] also knew his performance was perhaps not quite at the same level, but he made up for it in terms of the amount of work and dedication he put in. From that, Nico learned a lot and conversely, Lewis learned a lot from Nico." "It was not a race. It was a demonstration of brilliance." Stirling Moss about Schumacher at the 1996 Spanish Grand Prix In 1996, Schumacher finished third in the Drivers' Championship and helped Ferrari to second place in the Constructors' Championship ahead of his old team Benetton. During the season, the car had reliability problems; Schumacher did not finish in 7 of the 16 races. At the French Grand Prix, Schumacher took pole position but suffered engine failure on the formation lap. He won three races, more than the team's total tally for the period from 1991 to 1995, despite a poor chassis. He took his first win for Ferrari at the Spanish Grand Prix, where he lapped the entire field up to third place in the wet. After a bad start, which saw him dropping from third to sixth place, before taking the lead on lap 19, he consistently lapped five seconds faster than the rest of the field in the difficult conditions. At the Belgian Grand Prix, he used well-timed pit stops to fend off Williams' Jacques Villeneuve. He also took first place at the Italian Grand Prix to win in front of the tifosi (Ferrari fans). Schumacher and Villeneuve competed for the title in 1997, despite never sharing a podium and almost never battling directly on the track, in what has been described as the sport's most dramatic and controversial season finale. Villeneuve, driving the superior Williams FW19, led the championship in the early part of the season. Schumacher first win of the season came at the wet Monaco Grand Prix, in which he took a six-second lead after one lap. By mid-season, despite possibily driving not even the second-fastest car on the grid, Schumacher had taken the championship lead, winning five races, and entered the season's finale (the European Grand Prix at the Jerez circuit) with a one-point advantage. In qualifying, Schumacher set the same fastest lap as Villeneuve and Heinz-Harald Frentzenn. He started in second position as Villeneuve set his fastest lap first but was able to jump him at the start. Towards the end of the race, Schumacher's Ferrari developed a coolant leak and loss of performance indicating he might not finish the race. As Villeneuve approached to pass his rival on lap 48, Schumacher turned in on him but retired from the race. Villeneuve went on and scored four points to take the championship. Despite public outcry, the race stewards did not initially award any penalty, as they had deemed it a racing incident; two weeks after the race, in an unprecedented move, Schumacher was disqualified from the entire 1997 Drivers' Championship after an FIA disciplinary hearing found that his "manoeuvre was an instinctive reaction and although deliberate not made with malice or premeditation, it was a serious error." Initially feeling wronged, Schumacher accepted the decision and admitted having made a mistake, upon seeing the footage when he got out of the car and adrenaline had worn off. His actions were widely condemned in British, German, and Italian newspapers. Another view is that Villeneuve went into the corner too fast; without Schumacher turning into him, he would have overshot the turn and ended up in the gravel. In later years, Villeneuve himself admitted that he "would never have made that corner without [Schumacher's] push", and Schumacher stated in 2009 that if he could have his career over again, he would "do some things differently", citing Jerez 1997 as something that he would have changed in his career. In 1998, Finnish driver Mika Häkkinen became Schumacher's main title rival. Driving the superior McLaren MP4/13, Häkkinen won the first two races of the season, gaining a 16-point advantage over Schumacher, who then won the Argentine Grand Prix. With the Ferrari improving significantly in the second half of the season, Schumacher took six victories and had five other podium finishes. One of his victories was at the Hungarian Grand Prix, a track where overtaking is difficult and that favoured McLaren; Schumacher drove 19 consecutive qualifying-like laps to make Ross Brawn's alternative three-stop strategy work and to go from third to first place. Brawn had told him: "Michael, you have 19 laps to pull out 25 seconds. We need 19 qualifying laps from you." Schumacher ultimately came 9 seconds ahead of David Coulthard. Häkkinen, who started on pole, achieved only a point due to reliability issues. Ferrari took a 1–2 finish at the French Grand Prix, the first Ferrari 1–2 finish since 1990, and at the Italian Grand Prix, which tied Schumacher with Häkkinen for the lead of the Drivers' Championship with 80 points. There were two controversies during the 1998 season. At the British Grand Prix, Schumacher was leading on the last lap when he turned into the pit lane, crossed the start-finish line, and stopped to serve his ten-second stop-go penalty, which was a result of overtaking the lapped car of Alexander Wurz during a safety car period. There was some doubt whether this counted as serving the penalty; because he had crossed the finish line when he came into the pit lane, the win was valid. The FIA rescinded the penalty due to taking 31 minuites, rather than within the 25 minutes limit, and rejected McLaren's protest. At the Belgian Grand Prix, Schumacher was leading the race by 40 seconds in heavy spray but collided with Coulthard's McLaren when the Scot, a lap down, slowed on the racing line in poor visibility to let Schumacher past. His Ferrari lost a wheel but could return to the pits, although he was forced to retire. Schumacher leaped out of his car and headed to McLaren's garage in an infuriated manner and accused Coulthard of "trying to kill" him. Coulthard admitted five years later that the accident had been his mistake. From a possible three-point lead, Schumacher was still seven points behind Häkkinen. Heading into the final race, the Japanese Grand Prix, Häkkinen held a four-point advantage over Schumacher, who started on pole but stalled and caused the start to be aborted, which meant he had to start from the back of the field. He made a comeback up to third but retired after hitting debris from an accident. Häkkinen won the Drivers' Championship by winning the final two races despite Schumacher being the polesitter both times, continuing Ferrari's longest World Championship drought. In 1999, Schumacher's efforts helped Ferrari win the Constructors' Championship, the team's first title since 1983. He lost his chance to win the Drivers' Championship at the British Grand Prix at the high-speed Stowe Corner; his car's rear brake failed, sending him off the track into the barriers and resulting in a broken leg. During his 98-day absence, he was replaced by Finnish driver Mika Salo. About his return, Schumacher's Eddie Irvine teammate recalled: "It was amazing. I remember me and Mika Salo were testing at Mugello, which is one of the hardest circuits in the world – and he [Schumacher] hadn't driven for eight months. He got in the car and within a lap he was a tenth or two tenths slower than I was. How do you do that? And then of course a couple of laps later he's half a second quicker and – it's just impossible. It's really really annoying, but it was an honour to be able to see his telemetry and see the things he could do with a car." After missing six races, he made his return at the inaugural Malaysian Grand Prix, qualifying in pole position with his career's greatest pole margin, with his time faster than Eddie Irvine by almost a second. He then assumed the role of second driver, helping Irvine to victory and assisting his teammate's bid to win the Drivers' Championship for Ferrari, with Irvine leading the championship by one point. About Schumacher's role, Irvine stated: "He is not only the best driver in the world, he is also the best number two in the world." In the last race of the season, the Japanese Grand Prix, Häkkinen won his second consecutive title after he beat him off the line. Schumacher later said that Häkkinen was "the best opponent I've had" and the one he respected the most. in 2000, Schumacher won his third Drivers' Championship, his first with Ferrari, after a year-long battle with Häkkinen. Schumacher won the first three races of the season and five of the first eight. Midway through the year, Schumacher's chances suffered with three consecutive non-finishes, allowing Häkkinen to close the gap in the standings. At the German Grand Prix qualifying session, which was largely decided in the opening 10 minutes of semi-dry weather, Schumacher was able to improve his time in the final seconds and qualified second. In the race, he reitired after crashing out at the start, as his new teammate Rubens Barrichello took his maiden win from 18th. Häkkinen then took another two victories, before Schumacher won at the Italian Grand Prix, his 41th career win. At the post-race press conference, after equalling the number of wins won by his idol Ayrton Senna, Schumacher broke into tears. The championship fight came down to the penultimate race of the season, the Japanese Grand Prix. Starting from pole position, Schumacher lost the lead to Häkkinen at the start. After his second pit stop, Schumacher came out ahead of Häkkinen and went on to win the race and the Drivers' Championship; he later described it as the fight of his life. Although Schumacher won more than twice as many Grands Prix as Häkkinen, BBC Sport journalist Andrew Benson stated that "the challenge from Mika Hakkinen and McLaren-Mercedes was far stronger than the raw statistics suggest" and that the Adrian Newey-designed McLaren was "the fastest car in F1 for the third straight year". Benson also hailed Schumacher as "unquestionably the greatest driver of his era". In 2001, Schumacher took his fourth Drivers' title. Four other drivers won races but none sustained a season-long challenge for the championship. Schumacher scored a record-tying nine wins and clinched the World Championship with four races yet to run. He finished the championship with 123 points, 58 ahead of runner-up Coulthard. Season highlights included the Spanish Grand Prix, where he won after Häkkinen retired on the last lap due to his car's engine blowing up leading Schumacher to say he was sorry for him and that they had been "bloody lucky"; Canadian Grand Prix, where Schumacher finished second to his brother Ralf, thus scoring the first-ever 1–2 finish by brothers in Formula One; and the Belgian Grand Prix, in which Schumacher scored his 52nd career win, breaking Alain Prost's record for most career wins that had stood since 1993. In 2002, Schumacher retained his Drivers' Championship. In winning the Drivers' Championship, he equalled the record set by Juan Manuel Fangio of five World Championships. Ferrari won 15 out of 17 races, and Schumacher won the title with six races remaining in the season, which is still the earliest point in the season for a driver to be crowned World Champion. Schumacher broke his own record, shared with Nigel Mansell, of nine race wins in a season, by winning 11 times and finishing every race on the podium. He finished with 144 points, a record-breaking 67 points ahead of the runner-up, his teammate Barrichello. This pair finished nine of the 17 races in the first two places. During the 2002 season, there was some controversy at the Austrian Grand Prix, where Barrichello was leading but in the final metres of the race, under team orders, slowed down to allow Schumacher to win the race. Although the switching of positions did not break any actual sporting or technical regulation, as Ferrari did the same at the Austrian Grand Prix the previous year where Schumacher finishe second and Barrichello third, it angered fans and it was claimed that the team's actions showed a lack of sportsmanship and respect to the spectators. Many argued that Schumacher did not need to be given wins in only the sixth race of the season, which he would have won anyway, a view also shared by Jean Todt and Ross Brawn in retrospect, particularly given that he had already won four of the previous five Grands Prix, and that Barrichello had dominated the race weekend up to that point. At the podium ceremony, Schumacher pushed Barrichello onto the top step, and the Ferrari team incurred a $1 million fine for this disturbance. Schumacher vowed to pay back Barrichello, and later that same year returned the favour in several races to help him finish second in the standings. At the United States Grand Prix, Schumacher returned the favour, by giving Barrichello the win by 0.011 seconds, the second-closest margin on the finishing line in Formula One history in a failed dead heat finish. In an unplanned finish, Schumacher's explanation varied between it being him "returning the favour" for Austria, or trying to engineer a formation finish—a feat derided as near-impossible in a sport where timings are taken to within a thousandth of a second. After the end of the season, the FIA banned "team orders which interfere with the race result"; the ban was lifted for the 2011 season because the ruling was difficult to enforce. Schumacher broke Fangio's 46-year record of five Drivers' Championships by winning the drivers' title for the sixth time in 2003, after a closely contested battle with his main rivals, which was also a result of lobbying regarding the Michelin tyres. Before the season started, the FIA introduced new regulations and a new points system to make the championship more open. The biggest competition came from the McLaren-Mercedes and Williams-BMW teams. In the first race, Schumacher was run off track, and he was involved in collisions in the following two. He fell 16 points behind McLaren's Kimi Räikkönen. Despite the death of his mother Elisabeth just hours before the race, Schumacher won the San Marino Grand Prix despite being losing the first position into turn one. He also won the next two races and closed within two points of Räikkönen. Aside from Schumacher's victory at the Canadian Grand Prix and Barrichello's victory at the British Grand Prix, the mid-season was dominated by Williams drivers Ralf Schumacher and Juan Pablo Montoya, who each claimed two victories. After the Hungarian Grand Prix, Schumacher led Montoya and Räikkönen by only one and two points, respectively. Ahead of the next race, the FIA announced changes to the way tyre widths were to be measured: this forced Michelin, supplier to Williams and McLaren among others, to rapidly redesign their tyres before the Italian Grand Prix. Schumacher, running on Bridgestone tyres, won the next two races. After Montoya was penalised in the United States Grand Prix, only Schumacher and Räikkönen remained in contention for the title. At the final round, the Japanese Grand Prix, Schumacher needed only one point whilst Räikkönen needed to win. By finishing the race in eighth place, Schumacher took one point and assured his sixth Drivers' title, ending the season two points ahead of Räikkönen. In 2004, Schumacher won a record 12 of the first 13 races of the season, including the inaugural Bahrain Grand Prix and the Japanese Grand Prix, only failing to finish in Monaco after an accident with Montoya during a safety car period. In August 2004, Schumacher's win at the Hungarian Grand Prix contributed to Ferrari's sixth consecutive Constructors' Championship, and he later clinched a seventh Drivers' Championship at the Belgian Grand Prix. Earlier in July at the French Grand Prix, Schumacher beat polesitter Fernando Alonso with a four-stop strategy. He finished the season with a record 148 points, 34 points ahead of the runner-up Barrichello, and set a new record of 13 race wins out of a possible 18, surpassing his previous best of 11 wins from the 2002 season. Between 2000 and 2004, Schumacher achieved five Drivers' Championships, 48 wins, and almost all Formula One records. With his fifth Drivers' Championship in a row, he also broke Fangio's record of consecutive titles that had stood for nearly fifty years. Rule changes for the 2005 season required tyres to last an entire race, tipping the overall advantage to teams using Michelins over teams like Ferrari that relied on Bridgestone tyres. The rule changes were partly in an effort to dent Ferrari's dominance and make the series more interesting. The most notable moment of the early season for Schumacher was his battle with Renault R25 driver Fernando Alonso at the San Marino Grand Prix, where he started 13th and finished only 0.2 seconds behind Alonso. Less than halfway through the season, Schumacher stated: "I don't think I can count myself in this battle any more. It was like trying to fight with a blunted weapon. If your weapons are weak you don't have a chance." Schumacher's sole win in 2005 came at the United States Grand Prix in a 1–2 finish with Rubens Barrichello. Before that race, the Michelin tyres were found to have significant safety issues. When no compromise between the teams and the FIA could be reached, all but the three teams using Bridgestone tyres dropped out of the race after the formation lap, leaving only six drivers on the grid. Schumacher retired in 6 of the 19 races, and finished the season in third with 62 points, fewer than half the points of World Champion Alonso. 2006 became the last season of Schumacher's Ferrari career. After three races, Schumacher had just 11 points and was already 17 points behind Alonso. He won the following two races; his pole position at San Marino Grand Prix was his 66th, breaking Ayrton Senna's 12-year-old record, which was described as perhaps the greatest record that stood in the sport, and was a reversal of the 2005 race. Schumacher was stripped of pole position at the Monaco Grand Prix and started the race at the back of the grid, as he stopped his car and blocked part of the circuit while Alonso was on his qualifying lap; he still managed to work his way up to fifth place on the notoriously cramped Monaco circuit. Before the Turkish Grand Prix, the fourteenth race of the season, the FIA banned Renault's mass damper, with the superior Renault R26 suddenly no longer as competitive. By the Canadian Grand Prix, the ninth race of the season, Schumacher was 25 points behind Alonso; he then won the following three races, including at Hockenheim, to reduce his disadvantage to 11, and to 10 by Turkey. Since Canada, Ferrari won six out of seven races, including at Monza, with Schumacher winning in five of them. After further victories at the Italian Grand Prix, where he announced his retirement at the end of the season, and at the Chinese Grand Prix, in what would be his 91th and final career win, Schumacher led in the championship standings for the first time during the season. After his win in Italy, Ferrari issued a press release stating that Schumacher would retire from racing at the end of the 2006 season but would continue working for the team. The tifosi and the Italian press, who did not always take to Schumacher's relatively cold public persona, displayed an affectionate response after he announced his retirement. After qualifying second, Schumacher led the Japanese Grand Prix in what could have seen him heading into the season finale with two points ahead of Alonso. With only 16 laps to go, his car suffered an engine failure for the first time since the French Grand Prix, ending a 58-race sequence without a mechanical retirement, handing Alonso the victory. He also conceded the title; to win the Drivers' Championship, Schumacher would have had to win the final race and Alonso had to fail to score any point, and he did not wish to win the title like that. During the pre-race ceremonies of the season's last race, the Brazilian Grand Prix, former football player Pelé presented a trophy to Schumacher for his achievements in Formula One. A fuel pressure problem prevented Schumacher from completing a single lap during the third qualifying session, forcing him to start the race in tenth position. Early in the race, Schumacher moved up to sixth place but suffered a puncture caused by the front wing of Giancarlo Fisichella's Renault. Schumacher fell to 19th place, 70 seconds behind teammate and race leader Felipe Massa. Schumacher recovered and overtook both Fisichella and Räikkönen, his successor at Ferrari following his retirement, to secure fourth place. His performance was praised, as he had the pace to win the race by a lap, and was variously classified in the press as "heroic", an "utterly breath-taking drive", and a "performance that ... sums up his career". At the time, Schumacher's 91 wins were 40 more than Alain Prost, who was his nearest rival. Schumacher held at least thirty-one records, including for most championship titles (7), consecutive titles (5), race victories (91), consecutive wins 7 (2004), wins with one team (72, Ferrari), wins at same Grand Prix (8, France), wins at different Grands Prix (20), time between first and last wins (14 years, 1 month, and 2 days), second places (43), podiums (154), consecutive podium finishes (19, 2001–2002), points finishes (190), laps leading (4.741, or 22,155 km), pole positions (68), front row starts (115), fastest laps (76), doubles (pole and win, 40), hat-tricks (pole, fastest lap, and win, 22), championship points (1,369), consecutive race finishes (24, 2001–2003), consecutive points finishes (24), points in a season for the runner-up (121 out of 180, 2006), wins in a season for the runner-up (7, 2006), races for same car and engine builder (180, Ferrari), wins at Indianapolis (5), wins at Monza (5), wins in a season (13, 2004), fastest laps in a season (10, 2004), points scored in a season (148, 2004), podium finishes in a season (17, 2002), championship won with most races left (6, 2002), and consecutive years with a win (15). During the 2007 season, Schumacher acted as Ferrari's adviser and Jean Todt's super assistant. Schumacher also helped Ferrari with their development programme at the Jerez circuit. He focused on testing electronics and tyres for the 2008 season. During 2008, Schumacher also competed in motorcycle racing in the IDM Superbike series. At a Superbike cup race at the Pannónia-Ring, Schumacher finished third out of twenty-seven—behind professional motorcycle racers Martin Bauer and Andreas Meklau—riding a Honda CBR1000RR. At the Hungarian Grand Prix on 25 July 2009, Ferrari's Felipe Massa was seriously injured after being struck by a suspension spring during qualifying. Ferrari announced that they planned to draft in Schumacher for the European Grand Prix and subsequent Grands Prix until Massa was able to race again. Schumacher tested a modified Ferrari F2007 to prepare himself as he had been unable to test the Ferrari F60 due to testing restrictions. Ferrari appealed for special permission for Schumacher to test in a 2009 season spec car; Williams, Red Bull, and Toro Rosso were against this test. In the end, Schumacher was forced to call off his return due to the severity of the neck injury he had received in a motorcycle accident earlier in the year. Instead, Massa's place was first filled by Luca Badoer and later on by Giancarlo Fisichella. Schumacher described this aborted return to Formula One as his "toughest moment". "He played a crucial role when we re-joined F1 and was one of the people who laid the foundation for our future success. We're extremely grateful for everything he did for us." Mercedes' team principal Toto Wolff about Schumacher's influence on the Mercedes team In December 2009, Schumacher announced his return to Formula One for the 2010 season alongside fellow German driver and 24-years-old Nico Rosberg in the new Mercedes GP team. The 2009 season had ended with Brawn GP (taking over from Honda) winning both titles, after winning six of the first seven races. For the 2010 season, Mercedes returned to the sport as a constructor for the first time since 1955, and Schumacher rejoined team principal Ross Brawn, who was behind all of his seven World Championships. Schumacher stated that his preparations to replace the injured Massa had initiated a renewed interest in Formula One, which, combined with the opportunity to fulfil a long-held ambition to drive for Mercedes and to be working again with team principal Ross Brawn, led Schumacher to accept the offer once he was passed fit. Schumacher signed a three-year contract, reportedly worth £20 million. Schumacher's comeback was the most high profile in Formula One since Niki Lauda came out of a two-year retirement for the 1982 season to race for McLaren and went on to win a third world title in 1984. He turned 41 in 2010, the same age Nigel Mansell won the 1994 Australian Grand Prix after having stepped in as a substitute following the death of Ayrton Senna, and his prospects with Mercedes were compared with Nigel Mansell, who had won a title at 39 and last competed aged 41; Damon Hill, who competed his final season at 39; and Juan Manuel Fangio, Formula One's oldest champion who was 46 when he won his fifth title. Although Schumacher ultimately did not win any race or title, his conduct during his comeback was for the most part with humility and dignity, even as fans and pundits criticised Schumacher's lack of pace, wailed for him to stop, and argued that he should never have come back in the first place. In the three seasons before he retired again, Schumacher finished ninth, eighth, and 13th in the standings, led three laps, and notched one podium over 58 races. Despite a difficult start, which included adaptation to significant different regulations and new Pirelli tyres, as well as rust, and being bested by his teammate, he improved in the next two years where he arguably outraced Rosberg but bad luck and mechanical failures did not reflect it at the standings. Speaking to the BBC in December 2009, he said: "I want to have fun out there and I feel as fresh as ever. I've recharged myself after a three-year break. The challenge is what I look for – I want to know it." It has been argued that it was his 2009 motorcycle accident the reason why the comeback was not successful. In the words of Mark Hughes, "I believe his motorcycle accident, and the damaged neurons from a neck injury that in 90 per cent of cases is fatal, was probably more responsible for his lack of form second time around than age or length of absence." After having impressed in the free practices, Schumacher finished sixth in the first race of the season at the Bahrain Grand Prix, 1,239 days after his previous Formula One race. He finished behind teammate Nico Rosberg in each of the first four qualifying sessions and races; former driver Stirling Moss suggested that Schumacher might be "past it". Several other former Formula One drivers thought otherwise, including former rival Damon Hill, who warned "you should never write Schumacher off". GrandPrix.com identified the inherent understeer of the Mercedes car, exacerbated by the narrower front tyres introduced for the 2010 season, as contributing to Schumacher's difficulties. Jenson Button would later claim that Mercedes's car was designed for him, as he would initially drive for the team, and that their differing driving styles may have contributed to Schumacher's difficulties. Mercedes upgraded their car for the Spanish Grand Prix where Schumacher finished fourth. At the Monaco Grand Prix, Schumacher finished sixth after passing Ferrari's Fernando Alonso on the final corner before the finish line when the safety car returned to the pits. Mercedes held that "the combination of the race control messages 'Safety Car in this lap' and 'Track Clear' and the green flags and lights shown by the marshals after safety car line one indicated that the race was not finishing under the safety car and all drivers were free to race." An FIA investigation found Schumacher guilty of breaching safety car regulations and awarded him a 20-seconds penalty, dropping him to 12th. In doing so, the FIA sought to clarify the regulations post-race, as the new and old rules appeared to be in conflict. At the Turkish Grand Prix, Schumacher qualified fifth and finished fourth in the race, both his best results since his return. At the European Grand Prix in Valencia, Schumacher finished 15th, the lowest recorded finish in his career. At the Hungarian Grand Prix, Rubens Barrichello attempted to pass Schumacher down the inside on the main straight. Schumacher closed the inside line to force Barrichello onto the outside; Barrichello persisted on the inside at 180 mph (290 km/h) despite the close proximity of a concrete wall and Schumacher leaving him only inches to spare. Schumacher, who finished 12th, was found guilty of dangerous driving and was demoted ten places on the grid for the following race, the Belgian Grand Prix, where he finished seventh despite starting 21st after his grid penalty. At the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, Schumacher was involved in a major accident on the first lap, after Vitantonio Liuzzi's car collided with Schumacher's, barely missing his head. Schumacher finished the season in ninth place with 72 points. For the first time since 1991, Schumacher finished a year without a win, pole position, podium, or fastest lap. After starting the 2011 season with a retirement, Schumacher's first points were scored at the Malaysian Grand Prix where he finished ninth; Schumacher later came sixth in Spain, and he took fourth place at the Canadian Grand Prix, after running as high as second in a wet race; his Canadian race was seen at the time as his most convincing performance since he came out of retirement. Despite starting last at the Belgian Grand Prix, twenty years after his debut, Schumacher finished fifth. The Japanese Grand Prix saw Schumacher lead three laps during the race, marking the first time he had led a race since 2006. In doing so, he became the oldest driver to lead a race since Jack Brabham in 1970. Schumacher finished the season in eighth place in the Drivers' Championship, with 76 points. Schumacher was again partnered by Nico Rosberg at Mercedes for the 2012 season. After qualifying fourth in what was his best qualifying since his return, he retired from the season's inaugural Australian Grand Prix, and scored a point in the second round at the Malaysian Grand Prix with intermittent rain, after qualifying third. At the Chinese Grand Prix, Schumacher started on the front row but retired due to a loose wheel after a mechanic's error during a pit stop. After causing a collision with Bruno Senna at the Spanish Grand Prix, Schumacher received a five-place grid penalty for the Monaco Grand Prix. Twenty-one years into his career, Schumacher was fastest in qualifying in Monaco but started sixth owing to his penalty. He later retired from seventh place in the race. At the European Grand Prix, Schumacher finished third, his only podium finish since his return to Formula One. At 43 years and 173 days, he became the oldest driver to achieve a podium since 1970, when Jack Brabham achieved second-place finish at the British Grand Prix. At the German Grand Prix, Schumacher set the fastest lap for the 77th time in his career. At the Belgian Grand Prix, Schumacher became the second driver in history (after Rubens Barrichello) to race in 300 Grands Prix; he took seventh place after starting 13th. Schumacher's indecision over his future plans led to him being replaced by Lewis Hamilton at Mercedes for the 2013 season. In October 2012, days before the Japanese Grand Prix, Schumacher announced he would retire for a second time, stating: "There were times in the past few months in which I didn't want to deal with Formula One or prepare for the next Grand Prix." In what would be his 308th and last entry and 306th race start, Schuamcher concluded the season with a seventh-place finish at the Brazilian Grand Prix, which was also the position he started his first Formula One race. During the race, he symbolically pulled over for fellow German Sebastian Vettel en route to his then third Drivers' Championship. Schumacher never won a race and never finished higher than eighth in the overall Formula One standings during his comeback, placing 13th in the 2012 Drivers' Championship, and closed his career with 91 wins,155 podiums, and 68 pole positions, which at the time were all records. Before it was surpassed by Hamilton in 2020, Schumacher's 91 wins were one short of the combined win totals of Ayrton Senna and Alain Prost; as of 2019, only 81 drivers in the history of the Formula One World Championship had started more races than he won. Although Schumacher did not win any race or title at Mercedes GP, which then went on to win a record-breaking (of Schumacher's Ferrari from 1999 to 2004) eight Constructors' Championships under Hamilton, Rosberg, and Valtteri Bottas from 2014 to 2021, Ross Brawn said that "Michael's contribution to our development and the future of our team has been significant", and observed: "In my opinion, he is the greatest Formula One driver, and the records which he holds in our sport speak volumes for his success and commitment." Schumacher, in conjunction with Schuberth, helped develop the first lightweight carbon fibre reinforced polymer helmet. In 2004, a prototype was publicly tested by being driven over by a tank; it survived intact. The helmet kept the driver cool by funneling directed airflow through fifty holes. Schumacher's original helmet sported the colours of the German flag and his sponsor's decals. On the top was a blue circle with white astroids. From the 2000 Monaco Grand Prix, in order to differentiate his colours from his new teammate Rubens Barrichello—whose helmet was predominantly white with a blue circle on top and a red ellipsis surrounding the visor—Schumacher changed the upper blue colour and some of the white areas to red. For the 2006 Brazilian Grand Prix, he wore an all-red helmet that included the names of his ninety-one Grand Prix victories. At the 2011 Belgian Grand Prix, Schumacher's 20th anniversary in Formula One, he wore a commemorative gold-leafed helmet, which included the year of his debut and the seasons of his seven Drivers' titles. During his 300th Grand Prix appearance at the 2012 Belgian Grand Prix, Schumacher wore a platinum-leafed helmet with a message of his achievement. Helmet for the 1994 season (Benetton); Schumacher used the Bell Sports helmet for nine years in Formula One, from the Canadian Grand Prix to the Australian Grand Prix. Bell helmet for the 1995 season (Benetton); Schumacher kept using this white-coloured helmet after moving to Ferrari in 1996 until he switched its colour to red at the Monaco Grand Prix. Schuberth helmet for the 2002 season (Ferrari); at the Malaysian Grand Prix, Schumacher switched his helmet from Bell to Schuberth, although there was a contract with Bell for the 2001 season. From the 2001 season, Schumacher continued to use the Schuberth helmet until his last race in Formula One. Schuberth helmet at the Museo Ferrari with the Marlboro logo, which sometimes had to be removed in countries where tobacco advertising was illegal. Schuberth helmet for the 2011 season (Mercedes GP); Schumacher kept using a red-coloured helmet at Silver Arrows. Chinese dragon illustration and a Chinese character (力, which stands for "power") are inscribed on the back of the helmet. Schumacher's career spanned three decades, or twenty-three years, and left a lasting impact on the sport, Formula One in particular but also motorsport as a whole, and his influence extended beyond his own racing career. By the time of his first retirement in 2006 and his final retirement in 2012, Schumacher was widely considered among the greatest Formula One drivers, a trend that continued into the 2020s. Several commentators and drivers, including among others multi-time World Champions Niki Lauda and Sebastian Vettel, former rival David Coulthard, former Formula One driver Giancarlo Fisichella, and Mercedes team bosses Ross Brawn and Toto Wolff, have at times described him as the greatest of his era and the greatest of all time. Schumacher was the sport's most dominant force in the 2000s, being described as statistically the most successful driver in Formula One history and the most complete Formula One driver ever. By 2004, Schumacher came to held most major Formula One records, and by 2006 his name was inscribed in almost all of Formula One's record books, including for most World Championships (7), most wins (91), most podiums (154), most pole positions (68), and most fastest laps (77), the latter a record he still holds. Although several of his records were later equalled or beaten, such as the most wins in a season at 13 (a record he first broke in 1995 and then equalled in 2000 and 2001, and further improved in 2002 and 2004), by multiple-time World Champions like Vettel, Lewis Hamilton, and Max Verstappen, others remain his, such as his 100 percent podium finish in 2002 (17), which included eleven wins, five second places, and one third place. As of 2006, Schumacher was the driver to have made the most starts with the same constructor (Ferrari, 180) and engine manufacturer (Ferrari, 180). He and Rubens Barrichello were the two drivers who have made the most starts as teammate (102, 2000–2005) and most 1–2 finishes (24 in the same period). In 2004, Schumacher tied Nigel Mansell for the record of most wins at the start of a season, and he tied Senna for most pole positions at the same circuit (eight, with Schumacher at Suzuka and Senna at Imola). At 15 seasons, he holds the record for most consecutive seasons of winning at least one race (shared with Hamilton), and he holds the record for most wins at the same venue (eight, at the Magny-Cours circuit in France) and also the record for the most wins in the same Grand Prix (eight, France). At the 2003 Italian Grand Prix, he set the record for the race win at the fastest ever average speed of 247.586 kph (153.843 mph). By 2006, he had spent a record 5,108 of his racing laps in the lead, and led 141 races. He also made the most starts from the front row (115), scored the most points (1,369) before the point-system was overhauled in 2010, finished the most races in the points consecutively (24, from 2001–2003), and held the record for most consecutive fastest laps at the same circuit (7). In 2002, he won the World Championship with six rounds to spare, which was earlier in the year than anyone before him (21 July). Objective mathematical models, such as Eichenberger and Stadelmann (2009, 3rd), original F1metrics (2014, 4th), Bell et al. (2015, 3rd), FiveThirtyEight (2018, 2nd), and updated F1metrics (2019, 1st), put Schumacher consistenly among the top 10 and top 5 greatest Formula One drivers ever. Schumacher, who dominated the sport in the 1990s and early 2000s becoming in 1995 the youngest back-to-back World Champion at the time, was noted for his ability in the rain, winning many of the wet races he took part in, most notability Spain in 1996, and for his race pace, being able to set consecutive qualifying fastest laps; due to refuelling, he missed out several pole positions, having set his race strategy through more fuel on board (from his debut in 1991 through to the end of 2002 before the introduction of race-fuel qualifying from 2003 onwards, Schumacher was only outqualified 13 times in 178 race entries), and won 23 percent more than his pole positions. He also respectively won 51 and 24 times without starting first or from the front row, and had 48 wins with fastest lap, all three being more than any other driver, and converted 40 of his pole positions to wins at 58 percent, a record number that was later beaten by Hamilton. By the time he first retired in 2006, with 91 wins in 248 starts out of 250 entries (only behind Riccardo Patrese), Schumacher had a win ratio of 36 percent of starts, ahead of Formula One legends Ayrton Senna and Alain Prost, both of them at 25 percent of starts. He also had 27 percent of pole positions, 30 percent of fastest laps, and the most victories from pole with fastest lap at 22. He also could have won even more races had he went to the dominant teams of the 1990s (Williams and McLaren) and not joined Ferrari in 1996, a view echoed by his former teammate Eddie Irvine, and could have become the first driver to win 100 races were it not for some situations that went beyond his control, such as reliability issues causing him to finish lower than first in 1994, one revoked win in 1994, two unfortunate collisions with Coulthard and Juan Pablo Montoya in 1998 and 2004, the two wins he gave to Irvine and Barrichello in 1999 and 2002, and retirements in 1994, 2006, and 2012. Schumacher was noted for beating all his teammates during his Formula One career, except for his debuting not-fully season against three-time World Champion Nelson Piquet, once for 1999 World Championship runner-up Eddie Irvine due to missing six races after a leg injury, and future 2016 World Champion Nico Rosberg when he was in his 40s. Schumacher was also noted for outperforming his cars and for his ability to operate at his peak on every lap, having won significant more races than he had either pole positions or fastest laps. Apart from dominating the 1995, 2001, 2002, and 2004 World Championships (with 2002 and 2004 being the sole years where he drove the clear-cut fastest car as Barrichello was the runner-up both years), he won the competitive 2003 World Championship and either won (three times) or narrowly missed (two times) World Championships despite arguably driving an inferior car (1994, 1995, 1997, 1998, and 2000), and arguably would have won in 1999 had it been for the injury, as the performance gap from McLaren was far smaller than in 1998. Since the 1994 death of Senna, Schumacher was widely regarded as the fastest driver in Formula One and the most dominant driver of his era. During his long career, Schumacher was also involved in several controversies, most notability the 1994 and 1997 World Championship seasons finale and the 2006 Monaco qualifying. These episodes have been seen as a result of Schumacher's will-to-win mentality. In 2020, Martin Brundle commented: "The make-up of a champion is one of such inner self-belief that occasionally it shows up as flaws. The majority of the sporting greats I've met drive themselves forwards because they are always dissatisfied. But look at what Michael achieved, the speed at which he achieved it, and what he accomplished at two different teams. It's so hard to get to F1, to stay in it, to score podiums, and win races. And that guy won 91 of them, some of them in a class of one." Schumacher has been honoured many times. In 1992, the German Motor Sport Federation awarded him the ONS Cup, the highest accolade in German motorsport; he also won the trophy in 1994, 1995, and 2002. In 1993, he won a Bambi Award (Sports) and was the first racing driver to receive the Golden Steering Wheel. In 1994 and from 2001 to 2003, Schumacher was voted European Sportsperson of the Year by the International Sports Press Association. He was voted by Polish Press Agency the European Sportsperson of the Year from 2001 to 2003. In 1995 and from 2000 to 2002, he was named Autosport International Racing Driver of the Year. Schumacher was voted German Sportspersonality of the Year in 1995 and 2004. During the latter year, he was voted Germany's greatest sportsperson of the 20th century, beating Birgit Fischer and Steffi Graf to the accolade. For his sports achievements and his commitment to road safety, Schumacher was awarded Germany's highest sporting accolade, the Silbernes Lorbeerblatt, in 1997. In 2002, for his contributions to sport and his contributions in raising awareness of child education, Schumacher was named as one of the UNESCO Champions for Sport. Schumacher won the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year in 2002 and 2004, received the Marca Leylenda award in 2001, was named L'Équipe Champion of Champions three times (from 2001 to 2003), won the Gazzetta World Sports Award twice (2001 and 2002), and won the 2003 Lorenzo Bandini Trophy. In honour of Schumacher's racing career and his efforts to improve road safety and the sport, he was awarded an FIA Gold Medal for Motor Sport in 2006. The same year, ahead of his final race for Ferrari at Interlagos on 22 October, football player Pelé presented a "Lifetime Achievement Award" to Schumacher. In 2007, he received the Prince of Asturias Award for Sport for his sporting prowess and his humanitarian record. Together with Sebastian Vettel, Schumacher won the Race of Champions Nations' Cup six times in a row for Germany, from 2007 to 2012. In 2017, Schumacher was inducted into the FIA Hall of Fame and Germany's Sports Hall of Fame. In 2020, Jean Todt honoured Schumacher with the FIA President Award, in recognition of Schumacher's seven World Championships and the "inspiration his sporting and personal commitments brought to the world". In Sarajevo, Schumacher was granted honorary citizenship, while the Assembly of the Sarajevo Canton renamed major city transversal street after him, and earlier a large street mural was painted in a city neighborhood of Dobrinja by a group of artists. Honorary citizenship was also granted by Maranello, Modena, and Spa. He was appointed Chevalier de la Légion d'honneur, was honoured with the Commander of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic, and was appointed an ambassador of San Marino. In 2008, the Swiss Football Association appointed Schumacher as the country's ambassador for UEFA Euro 2008, hosted by Switzerland and Austria. In recognition of his contribution to Formula One, the Nürburgring circuit renamed turns 9 and 10 as the Schumacher S in 2007. In 2014, the first corner of the Bahrain International Circuit was renamed in honour of Schumacher. He was awarded the State Prize of North Rhine-Westphalia in 2022. In August 1995, Schumacher married Corinna Betsch. They have two children, a daughter Gina-Maria (born 20 February 1997) and a son, Mick (born 22 March 1999). Schumacher has always been very protective of his private life and is known to dislike the celebrity spotlight. From late 1991 until May 1996, Schumacher resided in Monaco. The family moved to a newly built mansion near Gland, Switzerland, in 2007, covering an area of 650-square-metre (7,000 sq ft) with a private beach on Lake Geneva and featuring an underground garage and petrol station, with a vintage Shell fuel pump. Schumacher and his wife own horse ranches in Texas and Switzerland. Schumacher's younger brother Ralf, his son Mick, his nephew David and step-brother Sebastian Stahl have also been racing drivers. Ralf Schumacher competed in Formula One for ten years, starting from 1997 until the end of 2007. Mick became the third Schumacher to race in Formula One, having made his debut with Haas F1 Team in the 2021 season. Before his skiing accident, Schumacher's main hobbies included horse riding, motorcycle racing, and sky diving, and he played football for his local team FC Echichens. Schumacher appeared in several charity football games, and organised games between Formula One drivers. He is a supporter of 1. FC Köln, his local football club where he grew up, citing Pierre Littbarski and Harald Schumacher as his idols. He is a Roman Catholic. In 2006, Schumacher had a voice role in the Disney/Pixar film Cars. His character is himself as a Ferrari F430 who visits the town of Radiator Springs to get new tires from Luigi and Guido at the recommendation of Lightning McQueen. During arrival, Luigi and Guido both faint in excitement when they see him. The French film Asterix at the Olympic Games features Schumacher in a cameo role as a chariot driver called Schumix. In 2009, Schumacher appeared on the BBC's motoring programme Top Gear as the Stig. Presenter Jeremy Clarkson hinted later in the programme that Schumacher was not the regular Stig, which the BBC subsequently confirmed. Schumacher was there because Ferrari would not allow anyone else to drive the unique black Ferrari FXX that was featured in the show. In July 2021, Netflix announced the first officially approved documentary film about Schumacher—called Schumacher—which was released on 15 September 2021. Schumacher was a special ambassador to UNESCO and has donated €1.5 million to the organisation. Additionally, he paid for the construction of a school for poor children and for area improvements in Dakar, Senegal. He supported a hospital for child victims of the siege in Sarajevo, which specialises in caring for amputees. In Lima, Peru, he funded the Palace for the Poor, a centre for helping homeless street children obtain an education, clothing, food, medical attention, and shelter. Schumacher told F1 Magazine: "It's great if you can use your fame and the power your fame gives you to draw attention to things that really matter." For the 2002 European floods, Schumacher donated €1 million; years later, Schumacher did the same when he donated €500,000 after the 2013 European floods. He donated $10 million for aid after the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake, which surpassed that of any other sports person, most sports leagues, many worldwide corporations and even some countries. From 2002 to 2006, he donated at least $50 million to various charities. In 2008, he donated between $5 million and $10 million to the Clinton Foundation. Since his participation in an FIA European road safety campaign, as part of his punishment after the collision at the 1997 European Grand Prix, Schumacher continued to support other campaigns, such as Make Roads Safe, which is led by the FIA Foundation and calls on G8 countries and the United Nations to recognise global road deaths as a major global health issue. In 2008, Schumacher was the figurehead of an advertising campaign by Bacardi to raise awareness about responsible drinking. He featured in an advertising campaign for television, cinema and online media, supported by consumer engagements, public relations and digital media across the world. In 1999 and 2000, Forbes magazine listed him as the highest paid athlete in the world. In 2005, EuroBusiness magazine identified Schumacher as the world's first billionaire athlete. In 2005, Forbes ranked him 17th in its "The World's Most Powerful Celebrities" list. A significant share of his income came from advertising; Deutsche Vermögensberatung paid him $8 million over three years from 1999 for wearing a 10 by 8 centimetre advertisement on his post-race cap. In 2010, his personal fortune was estimated at £515 million. In 2017, Forbes designated Schumacher as the athlete with the fifth highest career earnings of all-time. On 29 December 2013, Schumacher was skiing with his then 14-year-old son Mick, descending the Combe de Saulire below the Dent de Burgin above Méribel in the French Alps. An experienced skier, while crossing an unsecured off-piste area between Piste Chamois and Piste Mauduit, he fell and hit his head on a rock, sustaining a serious head injury despite wearing a ski helmet. According to his physicians, he would most likely have died had he not been wearing a helmet. He was airlifted to Grenoble Hospital where he underwent two surgical interventions. Schumacher was put into a medically induced coma because of traumatic brain injury. By March 2014, there were small encouraging signs. In early April 2014, he was showing moments of consciousness as he was gradually withdrawn from the medically induced coma. In June 2014, Schumacher left Grenoble Hospital for further rehabilitation at the Lausanne University Hospital, Switzerland. In September 2014, Schumacher left the hospital and was brought back to his home for further rehabilitation. Since Schumacher's accident, there was little public information about his condition or recovery, with his family asking for privacy. In November 2014, it was reported that Schumacher was "paralysed and in a wheelchair", and that he "cannot speak and has memory problems". In May 2015, Schumacher's manager Sabine Kehm stated that his condition was slowly improving "considering the severeness of the injury he had". In September 2016, Felix Damm, lawyer for Schumacher, told a German court that his client "cannot walk", in response to reports from December 2015 in German publication Die Bunte that he could walk again. In July 2019, former Ferrari manager Jean Todt stated that Schumacher was making "good progress" but also "struggles to communicate". Todt also said that Schumacher was able to watch Formula One races on television at his home. In September 2019, Le Parisien reported that Schumacher had been admitted to the Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou in Paris for treatment by cardiovascular surgeon Philippe Menasché, described as a "pioneer in cell surgery". Following the treatment, which involved him receiving an anti-inflammatory stem cell perfusion, medical staff stated that Schumacher was "conscious". Schumacher's family maintains strict privacy about his condition; as of 2024[update], he has not been seen in public since the accident. In April 2023, Die Aktuelle published what it advertised as a "first interview" with Schumacher, including alleged quotes from him about his health and family; it soon emerged that these responses had been fabricated using generative artificial intelligence. Schumacher's family said that they would sue the magazine, which fired the editor responsible. (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap) (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap) (key) (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap) ‡ Schumacher was disqualified from the 1997 World Drivers' Championship due to dangerous driving in the European Grand Prix, where he caused an avoidable accident with Jacques Villeneuve. His points tally would have placed him in second place in that year's standings. † Driver did not finish the Grand Prix but was classified as he completed over 90% of the race distance. Schumacher holds the following Formula One records: Footnotes Record shared with Lewis Hamilton Record shared with Max Verstappen (2023) Record shared with Lewis Hamilton at the Hungarian and British Grands Prix Record shared with Lewis Hamilton at Silverstone and Hungaroring Record shared with Max Verstappen Record shared with Kimi Räikkönen (2005 and 2008) Record shared with Lewis Hamilton 15761 Schumi Forbes list of the world's highest-paid athletes Häkkinen–Schumacher rivalry Hill–Schumacher rivalry List of career achievements by Michael Schumacher Michael Schumacher Racing World Kart 2002 Schumacher Specific Donaldson, Gerald (2016). "Hall of Fame – World Champions: Michael Schumacher". Formula1.com. Archived from the original on 6 October 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2018. Collings, Timothy (2005). Team Schumacher. Highdown. pp. 35–37. ISBN 978-1-905156-03-0. "The Beginning". MSchumacher.com. 2006. Archived from the original on 16 April 2007. Retrieved 23 April 2007. Domenjoz, Luc (2002). Michael Schumacher: Rise of a genius. Parragon. pp. 10–12, 170–171. ISBN 978-0-7525-9228-2. Schumacher vs Hakkinen | 1990 Macau Formula 3 Race. 12 November 2019. Archived from the original on 12 May 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2021 – via YouTube. Kopu, Ville; Nottmeier, Jan (24 October 2006). "Schumacher 500: Has the King Lost His Crown?". Autosport.com. Archived from the original on 7 October 2015. Retrieved 27 February 2020. Goren, Biranit (17 October 2001). "The View from the Top: Exclusive Interview with Michael Schumacher". Atlas F1. Archived from the original on 17 July 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. Watkins, Gary (February 2005). "Schumacher at Sauber". Autosport.com. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013. Retrieved 17 December 2012. Kollmar, Tom; Milewski, Michel; Rulle, Silja (11 December 2021). "Niemand wird je größer als Schumi sein" [Nobody will ever be greater than Schumi]. Bild (in German). Archived from the original on 27 July 2022. Retrieved 12 December 2021. "Formula 1's Greatest Drivers: 2. Michael Schumacher". Autosport. Haymarket Publications. 10 December 2009. Archived from the original on 26 March 2014. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher – Master of the F1 Circuit". Auto Racing. 2007. Archived from the original on 21 August 2007. Retrieved 12 July 2007. Foster, Michelle (3 January 2024). "Michael Schumacher's 10 iconic Formula 1 grand prix victories". PlanetF1. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Hamilton, Maurice (2020). Formula One: The Champions: 70 years of legendary F1 drivers. White Lion Publishing. pp. 166–175. ISBN 9781781319468. Schulz, Nick (23 June 2004). "The Ultimate Driving Machine". Slate. Archived from the original on 17 July 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. "Michael Schumacher". Grand Prix Dynamics. 2023. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher – From Go-Carts to Grand Prix". Deutsche Welle. 30 September 2003. Archived from the original on 17 July 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. Hodge, Stuart (18 January 2023). "Schumacher 'never even sweated' during F1 races". GPFans.com. Archived from the original on 14 August 2023. Retrieved 14 August 2023. Hust, Fabian (30 August 2003). "Schumacher: Beeindruckende Analyse seiner Fahrkunst" [Schumacher: Impressive analysis of his driving skills]. Motorsport-Total.com (in German). Archived from the original on 17 July 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. Hilton, Christopher (2003). Michael Schumacher: The greatest of all. Haynes. pp. 131–132. ISBN 978-1-84425-044-8. Hilton defined a race in wet conditions as "all races where it rained – even if that was a shower".{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: postscript (link) Hardcastle, Jonathon. "Michael Schumacher". Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 12 July 2007. "Alonso ahead of Schumi". News24. 21 October 2006. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 22 October 2006. Tremayne, David (22 October 2006). "Schuey exit promises many twists and turns". The Independent. UK. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 22 October 2006. "Schu brought down to earth". ITV. 11 October 2006. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 14 October 2006. Sapa (11 September 2006). "The greatest driver of all time!". SuperWheels. Archived from the original on 27 September 2006. Retrieved 24 October 2006. "Schumacher tops F1 supporter poll". BBC Sport. 27 September 2006. Archived from the original on 28 September 2006. Retrieved 25 October 2006. Howell, Norman (2 March 2003). "So Michael, where did it all go wrong?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 July 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. "Remembering Michael Schumacher's first F1 world title | GRR". Goodwood. 4 January 2024. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Benson, Andrew (28 May 2006). "Schumacher's chequered history". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 31 August 2007. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "The Legend of Michael Schumacher: A Story of Triumph, Challenges, and Legacy". The Duo Chronicles. 7 April 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Noble, Jonathan (25 September 2006). "Vettel sorry to see 'idol' Schumacher go". Autosport. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 31 October 2006. Terry, Dylan (25 November 2020). "Vettel backs his countryman". NewsChain. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 1 February 2021. "Schumacher retains GPDA position". BBC Sport. BBC. 9 June 2006. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 30 November 2007. Gibson, Sean (25 August 2016). "25 reasons why Michael Schumacher is the greatest F1 driver of all time". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Tributes to Schumi". BBC Sport. 22 October 2006. Archived from the original on 2 August 2009. Retrieved 24 October 2006. "Michael Schumacher named Most Influential Person in F1 History after fan vote". Formula One Group. 13 May 2020. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 1 February 2021. Walfisz, Jonny (13 November 2023). "Culture Re-View: How Schumacher's first title made him controversial". Euronews. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Collings, Timothy (2004). The Piranha Club. Virgin Books. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-7535-0965-4. Hilton, Christopher (2006). Michael Schumacher: The whole story. Haynes. pp. 62–66. ISBN 978-1-84425-008-0. Chandhok, Karun (27 August 2021). "Driving the F1 icon that launched Schumacher's career". Autosport.com. Retrieved 11 February 2024. Hilton, Christopher (2006). Michael Schumacher: The whole story. Haynes. pp. 67–68. ISBN 978-1-84425-008-0. "1991 Belgian Grand Prix". Formula1.com. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014. Retrieved 24 October 2006. Collings, Timothy (2007). "Welcome to the Piranha Club". The Piranha Club. Virgin Books. ISBN 978-1-85227-907-3. "1991 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Knuston, Dan (14 September 2006). "Knutson: Schumacher as hard on teammates as anyone". ESPN.com. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Domenjoz, Luc (2006) [2002]. Michael Schumacher: Rise of a genius. Parragon. p. 38. ISBN 978-0-7525-9228-2. Henry, Alan, ed. (1992). Autocourse 1992–93. Hazleton Publishing. p. 50. ISBN 978-0-905138-96-1. Kehm, Sabine (2003). Michael Schumacher: Driving Force. Random House. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-09-189435-1. Aggarwal, Pranav (3 January 2018). "Remarkable Moments from Michael Schumacher's career". EssentiallySports. Retrieved 11 February 2024. "1990s F1 Drivers Ranked". F1 Analysis. 15 August 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "1992 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Grand Prix Results: Monaco GP, 1993". GrandPrix.com. Archived from the original on 9 November 2006. Retrieved 6 November 2006. Benetton first raced traction control at the 1993 Monaco Grand Prix, having introduced active suspension at the 1993 European Grand Prix (Domenjoz (2002) p. 40). Williams had first raced an active system in 1987 and used it throughout 1992 (Autocourse (1992) p. 50), while McLaren and Ferrari both introduced active cars in the final races of the 1992 season (Autocourse (1992) pp. 42, 80).{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: postscript (link) Beer, Matt (11 October 2020). "Schumacher and Hamilton's best, worst, oddest and wettest wins". The Race. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "1993 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Taylor, Simon (7 July 2014). "Lunch with... Riccardo Patrese". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "'The ugly duckling', the story of Benetton's B195". Autosport. 2002. Velasco, Paul (3 February 2020). "Benetton B194: The car that launched the Michael Schumacher Legend". Paddock Legends. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "A return to racing – Spanish Grand Prix 1994". Formula1.com. 30 April 2003. Archived from the original on 17 May 2008. Retrieved 26 May 2008. "Nine lost F1 wins that stopped Schumacher reaching 100". The Race. 27 October 2020. Archived from the original on 17 July 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. Saward, Joe (11 August 1994). "Globetrotter: Rocking the boat". GrandPrix.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008. Domenjoz, Luc (2006) [2002]. Michael Schumacher: The Rise of a Genius. Parragon. pp. 44–47. ISBN 978-0-7525-9228-2. Williams, Richard (1999). The Death of Ayrton Senna. Bloomsbury. pp. 177–179. ISBN 978-0-7475-4495-1. Hilton, Christopher (2006). Michael Schumacher: The whole story. Haynes. pp. 118–120. ISBN 978-1-84425-008-0. "Grand Prix Results: Belgian GP, 1994". GrandPrix.com. Archived from the original on 18 March 2006. Retrieved 13 May 2006. Hilton, Christopher (2006). Michael Schumacher: The whole story. Haynes. p. 142. ISBN 978-1-84425-008-0. "Road Warrior Michael Schumacher Has Made A Splash as the World's Top Race, Despite His Battle with Formula One Leadership". Sports Illustrated. 17 July 1995. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "1994 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Hill, Matt (15 January 2015). "The Champion That Never Saw the Final Flag Fall". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Henry, Alan (1998) [1996]. Wheel to Wheel: Great Duels of Formula One Racing. Weidenfeld Nicolson Illustrated. p. 117. ISBN 978-0-7538-0522-0. "Now we are 76...: Murray Walker". GrandPrix.com. 18 October 1999. Archived from the original on 3 December 2007. Retrieved 30 November 2007. "The lost honor of Michael Schumacher". GrandPrix.com. 3 November 1997. Archived from the original on 6 February 2007. Retrieved 24 October 2006. Molinaro, John F. (12 September 2006). "Top 10 Michael Schumacher Moments". CBC Sports. Archived from the original on 3 January 2007. Retrieved 3 November 2006. "Today in History – DW.COM". Todayinhistory.de. 13 November 1994. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 26 November 2015. Simmons, Marcus (7 July 2014). "How the war was won". Motor Sport. Archived from the original on 30 August 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2021. "Throwback: The 1995 Formula One season in photos". FOX Sports. Archived from the original on 22 March 2018. Retrieved 22 March 2018. "1995 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Belgian GP 1995 Watchalong: Michael Schumacher vs Damon Hill at wet Spa". Sky Sports. BSkyB. 27 May 2020. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 14 June 2022. Kabra, Akshat (14 December 2023). "'He was not outqualified by a teammate for 4 years' – Mind-boggling Michael Schumacher statistic shared by F1 pundit". Sportskeeda.com. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Cooper, Steve (August 2007). "McLaren dream team turns into nightmare". Autosport. Vol. 189, no. 6. pp. 6–8. Hamilton, Maurice (18 April 2009). "Brawn has the brains and grace to turn any formula one team into a world-beater". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 August 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2021. Baker, Andrew (20 October 2006). "Switch the key to Ferrari revival". London: Telegraph Sport. Archived from the original on 15 September 2012. Henry, Alan, ed. (1996). Autocourse 1996–97. Hazleton Publishing. pp. 46–48. ISBN 978-1-874557-91-3. George, Patrick (1 March 2015). "Remember Michael Schumacher's Incredible First Win For Ferrari?". Jalopnik. Archived from the original on 22 March 2018. Smit, Dylan (4 January 2019). "Schumi's Struggle – 1996 Ferrari F310". DriveTribe. Archived from the original on 1 September 2021. Retrieved 1 September 2021. Benson, Andrew (14 May 2016). "Spanish Grand Prix: Why Michael Schumacher's epic 1996 win matters". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 May 2016. Retrieved 15 May 2016. Allsop, Derick (10 July 1996). "Benetton's battle to restore power". The Independent. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "How driver style and set-up varies: Part Three". Formula1.com. 10 September 2002. Archived from the original on 5 February 2003. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Damon Interview Schumacher". F1 Racing. No. 12 January 2000. 31 October 1999. Archived from the original on 17 June 2000. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Schumacher confirms retirement". MSN Cars. 11 September 2006. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 28 September 2006. "Ferrari: Formula 1's Most Successful Team Enters a New Era". Formula1.about.com. Archived from the original on 12 July 2007. Retrieved 12 June 2007. Benson, Andrew (18 October 2006). "Schumacher 'made Ferrari great'". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 September 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2006. Turner, Kevin (1 February 2022). "Top 10 Ferrari F1 drivers ranked: Schumacher, Lauda, Alonso and more". Motorsport.com. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Cooper, Sam (2 January 2024). "Michael Schumacher: Alternative F1 career timeline predicted without accident". PlanetF1. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher brought Mercedes together, says Williams F1 team principal James Vowles". Sky Sports. 13 June 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "The Best of the Best". Autosport. 1999. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 5 October 2006. "Grand Prix Results: French GP, 1996". GrandPrix.com. Archived from the original on 19 May 2007. Retrieved 18 April 2007. Galvin, Max (1996). "Atlas Team F1 Review of 1996". Atlas F1. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Belgian GP, 1996". GrandPrix.com. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "1996 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Dias, Shayne (8 September 2021). "1996 Italian GP: When Michael Schumacher ended Ferrari's drought at home race". SportsLumo. Archived from the original on 8 September 2021. Retrieved 8 September 2021. Roebuck, Nigel (7 July 2014). "F1 1997: the same old story?". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Cooper, Adam (26 October 2017). "Untold story: When Schumacher met Villeneuve in the bar after Jerez '97". Motorsport.com. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Friday Press Conference". GrandPrix.com. 10 October 2003. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 8 November 2006. Williams-Smith, Jake (26 October 2020). "Michael Schumacher's moment of madness at Jerez 1997". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "1997 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (26 October 2017). "Villeneuve takes title as Schumacher's attack gets him thrown out". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Weeks, Jim (27 October 2016). "Collision and Collusion: The Story of the 1997 Formula 1 Title Decider". Vice. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher: Seven Time World Champion". eMercedesBenz. 25 November 2012. Archived from the original on 30 July 2013. Retrieved 18 January 2014. Roebuck, Nigel (3 November 1997). "Among the elite". Autoweek. Vol. 47, no. 44. p. 52. Retrieved 20 January 2021 – via EBSCO. Collantine, Keith (26 October 2017). "Villeneuve takes title as Schumacher's attack gets him thrown out". RaceFans. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Schumacher loses championship runner-up crown". BBC News. BBC. 11 November 1997. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010. Retrieved 5 July 2010. "FIA World Motor Sport Council – 11 November 1997" (PDF). FIA. 11 November 1997. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 November 2006. Retrieved 29 October 2006. Allen, James (2000). Michael Schumacher : Driven to Extremes. Bantam Books. p. 26. ISBN 978-0-553-81214-5 – via Internet Archive. Domenjoz, Luc (2006). Michael Schumacher: Rise of a Genius (5th ed.). Chronosports. p. 26. ISBN 978-2-84707-124-5. "Schumacher: I would change Jerez '97 if I could..." Crash.net. 10 November 2009. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Schumi: I Regret 1997". Eurosport. 11 November 2009. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Suttil, Josh (12 December 2021). "Inside stories from F1's last title-deciding scandal". The Race. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "1998 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Hughes, Mark (30 April 2020). "Hungary 1998: How a classic Schumacher/Brawn gamble snatched victory from McLaren". Formula One Group. Archived from the original on 17 July 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. Shukla, Janmeyjay (16 August 2022). "Michael Schumacher drove 19 qualifying laps to win 9 seconds ahead of David Coulthard". The SportsRush. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "1998: Schumacher strategy sinks McLaren". Autosport.com. 20 August 1998. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "French Grand Prix Review". Atlasf1.com. 28 June 1998. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Grand Prix of Italy Review". Atlasf1.com. 13 September 1998. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Phillips, James (2 September 2023). "Remembering Monza '98: A battle of the ages between Schumacher and his fiercest rival". GPfans.com. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "British Grand Prix Review". Autosport.com. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 24 October 2006. "Crash was my fault, Coulthard admits". Sydney Morning Herald. Reuters. 7 June 2003. Archived from the original on 23 June 2007. Retrieved 28 September 2006. "Coulthard issues stark warning". BBC Sport. 6 July 2003. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Knutson, Dan (18 October 2006). "Knutson: Word to the wise? Schumacher finds ways". ESPN.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Grand Prix of Luxembourg Review". Atlasf1.com. 27 September 1998. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Grand Prix of Japan Review". Atlasf1.com. 1 November 1998. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Bradley, Charles (3 March 2022). "Schumacher's 1998 Japanese GP Ferrari for sale". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (29 November 2008). "The championship droughts of Ferrari, McLaren, Williams and Benetton/Renault". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Mitchell, Scott (8 October 2013). "Breaking Down Ferrari's Biggest Droughts in Formula 1 History". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "These are Ferrari's longest title droughts in F1 history". GPblog.com. 11 August 2022. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Schumacher out of action". GrandPrix.com. 12 July 1999. Archived from the original on 9 May 2007. Retrieved 25 October 2006. Lupini, Michele (1999). "Suzuka Showdown". Atlas F1. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Roebuck, Nigel (20 December 2013). "The farce of the 1999 title decider". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 5 February 2024. "Drivers: Michael Schumacher". GrandPrix.com. Archived from the original on 17 November 2006. Retrieved 30 November 2006. "1999 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Masefield, Fraser (2 September 2013). "Ranking the Top 10 Number 2 Drivers in Formula 1 History". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 17 July 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. Donaldson, Gerald (2016). "Hall of Fame – World Champions: Mika Hakkinen". Formula1.com. Archived from the original on 9 February 2018. Retrieved 28 May 2018. Smith, Luke (8 April 2020). "The race that unearthed Schumacher's greatest rival". Motorsport.com. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "2000 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Benson, Andrew (21 April 2004). "A death that shocked the world". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 November 2010. Retrieved 21 April 2007. "Michael Schumacher's best races – Japanese Grand Prix 2000". BBC Sport. 30 December 2013. Archived from the original on 20 October 2018. Retrieved 22 March 2018. Mackley, Stefan (8 July 2020). "The day Schumacher ended Ferrari's 21-year wait for F1 glory". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Race of my life: Michael Schumacher on the 2000 Japanese GP". Autosport.com. 26 May 2020. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Benson, Andrew (22 October 2000). "Harder than it looked for Schumacher". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 30 August 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2021. "2001 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Grand Prix du Canada – Statistiques". Telus. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "Send your tributes to Schumacher". BBC Sport. 2 September 2001. Archived from the original on 22 October 2002. Retrieved 3 February 2007. Collantine, Keith (14 January 2020). "How Schumacher set a record 91 F1 wins – and Hamilton drew within striking distance". RaceFans. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Molinaro, John C. (12 September 2006). "Top 10 Michael Schumacher moments". CBC Sports. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 3 January 2007. Retrieved 6 January 2012. "2002 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. 3 July 2017. Archived from the original on 22 March 2018. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Formula One: Ferrari team-mate hands Schumacher controversial victory". Daily Telegraph. 12 May 2002. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 8 May 2019. Retrieved 13 February 2024. "Schumacher steals Austrian win". BBC Sport. 12 May 2002. Archived from the original on 15 May 2008. Retrieved 24 October 2006. "'Nothing Wrong' with Ferrari's Actions, Says Dennis". Autosport. 19 May 2002. Retrieved 5 February 2024. Taylor, Simon (7 July 2014). "Modern Times: Schumacher's Spielberg gift". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 5 February 2024. "Schumacher ends jinx in controversial finish". Dawn. 12 May 2002. Archived from the original on 16 September 2019. Retrieved 16 September 2019. Mancini, Stefano (18 November 2010). "Todt: 'Ferrari tradita dai nervi Sembrava impossibile perdere'". La Stampa (in Italian). Archived from the original on 16 September 2019. Retrieved 16 September 2019. Walsh, Fergal (6 February 2017). "Austria GP 2002 decision was a mistake – Brawn". GPToday.net. Archived from the original on 18 September 2019. Retrieved 18 September 2019. "Record fine for Turks". Eurosport. Reuters. 19 September 2006. Archived from the original on 23 November 2017. Retrieved 3 June 2020. "Schumacher Vows to Pay Back Barrichello". Autosport. 13 May 2002. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Baldwin, Alan (26 June 2002). "Ferrari Fined $1 Million over Austrian GP Incident". Autosport. Retrieved 5 February 2024. Hughes, Mark (16 December 2014). "Brawn's F1 journey: 'Schumacher and I were in the trenches together'". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "US GP 2002 – Schumacher repays Barrichello favour". Crash. 29 September 2002. Archived from the original on 28 April 2003. Retrieved 10 December 2023. Cavin, Curt (30 September 2002). "Classic payback: Schumacher hands USGP victory to Barrichello". The Indianapolis Star. pp. R1, R5. Archived from the original on 13 December 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2023 – via Newspapers.com . Gordon, Ian (30 September 2002). "Schu hands victory to Barrichello". Irish Examiner. Archived from the original on 11 December 2023. Retrieved 11 December 2023. Baldwin, Alan (29 September 2002). "We Tried to Finish Equal, Says Schumacher". Atlas F1. Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 January 2005. Retrieved 11 December 2023. Gray, Will (30 September 2002). "Paddock Consensus: Schumacher Made a Mistake". Atlas F1. Archived from the original on 29 January 2005. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Barrichello: I was confused too". Autosport. 10 October 2002. Archived from the original on 28 July 2021. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Schumacher slows, and Barrichello wins". Tampa Bay Times. 3 September 2005 [30 September 2002]. Archived from the original on 11 December 2023. Retrieved 11 December 2023. Brudenell, Mike (30 September 2002). "U.S. Grand Prix nearly a dead heat". Detroit Free Press. Retrieved 14 December 2023 – via Newspapers.com . Cavin, Curt (1 October 2002). "Speedway chief OK with finish". The Indianapolis Star. p. D1, D3. Archived from the original on 13 December 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2023 – via Newspapers.com . "'Unplanned' Ferrari finish backfires at US GP". ESPN. 30 September 2002. Archived from the original on 3 November 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2023. Collings, Timothy (1 October 2002). "Ferrari's tactics defended by Todt". The Daily Telegraph. p. S8. Archived from the original on 13 December 2023. Retrieved 13 December 2023 – via Newspapers.com . Legard, Jonathan (30 September 2002). "Ferrari's own goal". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 21 July 2004. Retrieved 28 February 2009. Wade, Stephen (28 October 2002). "Formula One closes door on team orders". USA Today. Archived from the original on 23 May 2008. Retrieved 28 October 2006. "F1 Commission declaration" (Press release). FIA. 28 October 2002. Archived from the original on 26 March 2007. Retrieved 30 October 2006. "F1 chiefs drop the ban on team orders in new rules". BBC Sport. 10 December 2010. Archived from the original on 7 November 2020. Retrieved 27 January 2011. "2003 Record World Champion". michael-schumacher.de. Archived from the original on 30 August 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2021. "Coulthard takes Melbourne thriller". BBC Sport. 9 March 2003. Archived from the original on 28 June 2004. Retrieved 3 November 2006. "Raikkonen claims maiden win". BBC Sport. 23 March 2003. Archived from the original on 15 June 2004. Retrieved 3 November 2006. "Raikkonen wins chaotic race". BBC Sport. 6 April 2003. Archived from the original on 26 April 2004. Retrieved 3 November 2006. "Raikkonen leads F1 standings after maiden win". ABC News. 23 March 2003. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Williams, Richard (21 April 2003). "Schumacher mourns mother on winner's podium". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 8 October 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2021. "FIA stands by tyre rulings". BBC Sport. 9 September 2006. Archived from the original on 2 March 2004. Retrieved 25 April 2007. "2003 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. 3 July 2017. Archived from the original on 22 March 2018. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Longman, Will (6 November 2023). "10 greatest Formula 1 drivers in history". Motorsport Tickets Blog. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "2004 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Mee, Lydia (1 March 2023). "Bahrain Grand Prix: Deep Dive Into The History Of The F1 Event". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Henry, Alan (24 May 2004). "Schumacher's run ends in farce and fury". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Baldwin, Alan (28 May 2004). "Schumacher Could have Won Monaco, Says Brawn". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Elizalde, Pablo (29 August 2004). "Atlas F1 Magazine: 2004 Belgian Grand Prix Review". Atlasf1.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Phelan, Mark (13 October 2023). "2004 Belgian Grand Prix: Schumacher's Seventh Drivers' World Championship". F1 History. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Hughes, Mark (2 April 2020). "Strategic Masterstrokes: How Ferrari stole victory from Renault with a secret 4-stop plan at France 2004". Formula1.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "A tribute to Michael Schumacher". F1technical.net. 2006. Archived from the original on 25 September 2008. Retrieved 1 December 2007. Jeffries, Tom (26 November 2023). "The 10 best Formula 1 drivers ever: Hamilton, Senna & more". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher | Biography, Wins, Championships, & Facts | Britannica". Encyclopedia Britannica Online. 1 January 2024. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "FIA announce rule changes for 2005 and 2006". Formula1.com. 22 October 2004. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008. Retrieved 13 April 2007. "Michael Schumacher". F1complete.com. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 30 November 2007. "Alonso holds off Schumacher surge". BBC Sport. 24 April 2005. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 3 November 2006. Cooper, Adam (24 April 2023). "The day Alonso gave Schumacher an F1 masterclass". Motorsport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Cozens, Jack (21 May 2023). "Why Imola's famous Alonso vs Schumacher duel was even possible". The Race. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Henry, Alan (27 July 2005). "Alonso within touching distance of title". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2006. Retrieved 5 November 2006. Maher, Thomas (18 October 2022). "F1's most controversial races: The 2005 United States Grand Prix". PlanetF1. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Schumacher takes hollow USGP victory". Crash.net. 19 June 2005. Archived from the original on 30 June 2008. Retrieved 19 June 2007. Collantine, Keith (19 June 2005). "Schumacher wins, F1 loses in six-car sham". RaceFans. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Cooper, Adam (19 June 2020). "The 2005 US GP farce: The full inside story". Motorsport.com. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "2005 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. 3 July 2017. Archived from the original on 22 March 2018. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Alonso: Schumi Won't Go". Eurosport. 6 April 2006. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Ferrari to fight back at Imola". Times of Malta. 21 April 2006. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Unbeatable Schumi sets new pole record". GPUpdate.net. 22 April 2006. Archived from the original on 25 April 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2016. "Schumacher sets all-time pole best". CNN. 22 April 2006. Retrieved 8 February 2024. O'Leary, James (23 April 2006). "Schumacher fends off Alonso to Imola win". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "San Marino 2006: Schumacher's Imola role reversal". Crash.net. 23 April 2006. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Schumacher in the dock". BBC Sport. 28 May 2006. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Weaver, Paul (12 May 2010). "Michael Schumacher will not revisit Fernando Alonso incident at Monaco". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (28 May 2006). "Alonso grabs Monaco win as Schumacher recovers to fifth". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "2006 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Alonso wins Canadian Grand Prix". CBC Sports. 25 June 2006. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Schumacher hails championship 'miracle'". Autosport.com. 1 October 2006. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Schumi: 'Never Say Die'". Eurosport. 27 June 2006. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher Wins German Grand Prix". Deutsche Welle. 30 July 2006. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Mass Dampers Banned". Eurosport. 23 August 2006. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Schumacher close to finishing on a high". The Sydney Morning Herald. 6 October 2006. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Zanca, Salvatore (1 October 2006). "Alonso has trouble with his front tires". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012. Retrieved 1 August 2007. Spurgeon, Brad (1 October 2006). "Formula One: Schumacher wins in China to edge Alonso in rankings". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher will retire from race driving at the end of the 2006 World Championship" (PDF) (Press release). Ferrari S.p.A. 10 September 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 November 2006. Retrieved 24 October 2006. Evans, Simon (11 September 2006). "Italy shows gratitude to Schumacher". Autosport.com. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 12 September 2006. Galloway, James (28 October 2012). "Michael Schumacher admits his F1 career unlikely to finish memorably". Sky Sports. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Henry, Alan (9 October 2006). "Formula One: Engine failure ruins Schumacher's dream". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 March 2018. Retrieved 22 March 2018. Kelley, Michael (9 October 2006). "Kelley: Schumacher's bad timing crushes title hopes". ESPN.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Lostia, Michele (8 October 2006). "Schumacher concedes the title to Alonso". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Henry, Alan (9 October 2006). "From hero to zero, Schumacher's hopes are suddenly blown". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Pele to present a trophy to Schumacher". International Herald Tribune. 22 October 2006. Archived from the original on 12 September 2019. Retrieved 1 August 2007. "Schumacher honored by a presentation from Pele". International Herald Tribune. 22 October 2006. Archived from the original on 12 September 2019. Retrieved 1 August 2007. "Schumacher suffers in qualifying". BBC Sport. 21 October 2006. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 1 August 2007. "Fisi did cause Schu puncture". ITV-F1. 23 October 2006. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (18 September 2009). "Did more foul play by Renault scupper Schumacher in the 2006 title decider?". RaceFans. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (22 October 2006). "Massa win, Alonso clinches title after final duel with Schumacher". RaceFans. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Superb Schumi signs off in style". BBC Sport. 22 October 2006. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2006. "Brazil: Alonso takes championship, but Michael steals the show". ManipeF1. 22 October 2006. Archived from the original on 10 May 2007. Retrieved 3 November 2006. "2006 Brazil Grand Prix Report". PitPass. Archived from the original on 15 July 2018. Retrieved 3 November 2006. "Michael Schumacher". Formula1.com. 2018. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher signs three-year contract with Mercedes". The Guardian. 23 December 2009. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher". Historic Racing. 3 January 2007. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Schumacher to help Ferrari select drivers". Autosport. 29 October 2007. Archived from the original on 20 October 2007. Retrieved 30 November 2007. Elizalde, Pablo. "Schumacher stays on top in Barcelona – F1 – Autosport". Autosport.com. Archived from the original on 23 March 2018. Retrieved 22 March 2018. Babel, Esther; Wiesinger, Günther (22 March 2008). "Schumi auf 2 Rädern!" [Schumi on 2 wheels!]. Motorsport aktuell (in German). Archived from the original on 26 January 2009. Retrieved 17 July 2023. "Michael happy to help". MichaelSchumacher.de. Archived from the original on 1 August 2009. Retrieved 8 August 2009. "Lealdade custa caro: Schumi ganhará cerca de R$8,5 milhões por corrida". Globo.com (in Portuguese). 29 July 2009. Archived from the original on 2 August 2009. Retrieved 30 July 2009. "Williams against Schumacher Ferrari test". GPUpdate.net. 3 August 2009. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 1 February 2011. "Red Bull echoes Williams's Ferrari sentiments". GPUpdate.net. 4 August 2009. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 1 February 2011. Moulson, Geir (11 August 2009). "Schumacher calls off comeback, cites neck injury". San Diego Union-Tribune. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Connolly, Kate (8 March 2010). "Michael Schumacher's doctor reveals recovery after neck injury". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Schumacher cancels F1 return". Carthuasiast.com. Archived from the original on 14 August 2009. Retrieved 12 August 2009. "Schumacher calls off Ferrari return due to neck injury". France 24. 11 August 2009. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Noble, Jonathan (3 September 2009). "Fisichella: Ferrari drive a dream for me". Autosport.com. Haymarket Publishing. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2016. "Schumacher's turmoil over failed F1 comeback". CNN. 12 August 2009. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Schumacher a 'founding father' of Mercedes success – Wolff". Formula One. 2019. Archived from the original on 24 April 2020. Retrieved 4 April 2020. "Michael Schumacher signs up for F1 return with Mercedes". BBC Sport. 23 December 2009. Archived from the original on 21 May 2020. Retrieved 23 December 2009. Noble, Jonathan (23 December 2009). "Schumacher targets 2010 world title". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Schumacher's return dominates start of F1 season in Bahrain". CNN. 12 March 2010. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Schumacher signs for Mercedes to return to F1 racing: report". The Sydney Morning Herald. 22 December 2009. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Musolino, Adrian (24 December 2009). "Schumacher returns for a legacy or misery". The Roar. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 24 December 2009. "Schumacher signs up for F1 return". BBC Sport. 23 December 2009. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Schumacher signs Mercedes deal". Al Jazeera. 23 December 2009. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Moore, Justin (15 April 2021). "In Formula One, Does The Driver Or Car Matter More?". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Hughes, Mark (16 July 2018). "F1 frontline: February 2018". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Hamilton, Maurice (14 March 2010). "Michael Schumacher remains steely about his F1 season prospects". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Gayle, Everton (23 December 2009). "Michael Schumacher agrees to Formula One return with Mercedes". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Schumacher is 'past it' – Moss". ESPN F1. 27 April 2010. Archived from the original on 28 September 2012. Retrieved 25 August 2011. "Damon Hill: Never, Ever, Ever, Ever Write Off Schumacher". The Black Stuff. The Media Halls. 8 July 2010. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 25 August 2011. "Will chassis upgrade solve Schumacher woes?". Inside F1, inc. 3 May 2010. Archived from the original on 3 June 2010. Retrieved 27 May 2010. "Schumacher's car designed for me – Button". WorldCarFans. Black Falcon Media Group. 28 July 2010. Archived from the original on 9 October 2010. Retrieved 13 December 2010. Collantine, Keith (9 May 2010). "Progress or favouritism at Mercedes? (Spanish Grand Prix team-by-team)". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Foster, Ed (9 May 2010). "2010 Spanish Grand Prix report". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Mercedes rule out appeal against Schumacher penalty". BBC Sport. 18 May 2010. Archived from the original on 21 May 2010. Retrieved 27 January 2011. Michael Schumacher penalised for late-race pass Archived 19 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine BBC Sport – F1 Spurgeon, Brad (10 November 2010). "Michael Schumacher: Return of the Racing King Failed to Dazzle". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Hill, Matt (4 December 2010). "Michael Schumacher: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly of His 2010 Season". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 10 May 2011. Young, Byron (27 June 2010). "Michael Schumacher blasts Valencia Grand Prix stewards". Daily Mirror. UK. Archived from the original on 18 November 2010. Retrieved 15 November 2010. Rae, Richard (1 August 2010). "Schumacher punished for dangerous move on Barrichello". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 28 July 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2010. "Michael Schumacher defended by Ross Brawn after Rubens Barrichello near-miss". The Daily Telegraph. UK. 2 August 2010. Archived from the original on 23 January 2011. Retrieved 27 January 2011. Collantine, Keith (3 August 2010). "2010 Hungarian Grand Prix – the complete F1 Fanatic race weekend review". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (1 August 2010). "Webber grabs Hungary win after Vettel blunder". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Elizalde, Pablo; O'Leary, Jamie (1 August 2010). "The complete 2010 Hungarian GP review". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Owen, Oliver (1 August 2010). "Michael Schumacher hit with grid penalty after 'dangerous manoeuvre'". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Roebuck, Nigel (30 August 2010). "2010 Belgian Grand Prix report". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Schumacher escapes unhurt from crash at Abu Dhabi". USA Today. David Hunke; Gannett Company. Associated Press. 14 November 2010. Archived from the original on 17 November 2010. Retrieved 20 November 2010. "Lucky escape for Michael Schumacher after crash with Vitantonio Liuzzi". The Daily Telegraph. UK. 14 November 2010. Archived from the original on 17 November 2010. Retrieved 20 November 2010. "Alonso wary of Schumacher threat". BBC Sport. 13 January 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "2010 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Cooper, Adam (7 July 2014). "Michael Schumacher's F1 comeback: 'People think I can only be happy when I win races'". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (28 March 2011). "Collisions spoil Mercedes' start to the season". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (29 March 2011). "2011 Australian Grand Prix: complete race weekend review". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (11 April 2011). "Schumacher scores for struggling Mercedes". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (24 May 2011). "2011 Spanish Grand Prix: complete race weekend review". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (13 June 2011). "Mercedes: Schumacher misses out on podium". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Tisshaw, Mark (2 June 2021). "Autocar's favourite races: 2011 Canadian Grand Prix". Autocar. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Button's Canada 2011 win is overhyped – we only want to remember a great race". RacingNews365. 14 June 2023. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "2011 Canadian GP review: Button bounces back to win". F1 Fanatic. 12 June 2011. Archived from the original on 19 October 2016. Retrieved 25 January 2017. Benson, Andrew (20 June 2011). "Michael Schumacher finally finds his form". BBC. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (28 August 2011). "Vettel victorious in dramatic Spa race". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Belgian Grand Prix 2011: Michael Schumacher eyes podium place in Spa on 20th anniversary of Formula One career". The Telegraph. 24 August 2011. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Beer, Matt; Straw, Eddie (28 August 2011). "The complete 2011 Belgian GP review". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (30 August 2011). "2011 Belgian Grand Prix: complete race review". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Sheringham, Sam (9 October 2011). "Japanese Grand Prix as it happened". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 September 2019. Retrieved 10 October 2011. Lap 40: This is the first time Schuey [sic] has led a race since the Japanese GP in 2006. "Michael Schumacher the greatest F1 driver of all time". ABC News. 30 December 2013. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 25 January 2017. "A better car the key to Schumacher's 2011 season". Motorsport.com. 30 September 2010. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "2011 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "2011 F1 Results & Standings Schedule". F1-Fansite.com. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 25 January 2017. "Schumacher could stay in F1 after 2012". ESPN F1. 27 January 2010. Archived from the original on 18 December 2014. Retrieved 25 July 2010. Lines, Chris (22 March 2012). "Schumacher has hopes high for Malaysian Grand Prix". San Diego Union-Tribune. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Brawn upbeat despite Melbourne failure". Press Association. 18 March 2012. Archived from the original on 28 February 2013. Retrieved 18 March 2012. Beer, Matt; Elizalde, Pablo (24 March 2012). "The complete Malaysian Grand Prix review". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (25 March 2012). "Alonso holds off Perez for superb win in Malaysia". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Michaels, Jakes (27 September 2017). "Memory lane: 19 years of the Malaysian GP". ESPN.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Spurgeon, Brad (13 April 2012). "Schumacher Shows He Can Still Be a Contender". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher's retirement at Chinese Grand Prix – What exactly happens when a wheel nut is loose?". 19 April 2012. Archived from the original on 23 March 2018. Retrieved 22 March 2018. Beer, Matt; Creighton, Geoff (13 May 2012). "Schumacher, Senna blame each other for Spanish Grand Prix accident". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Benson, Andrew (13 May 2012). "Michael Schumacher penalised for Bruno Senna clash". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Cary, Tom (26 May 2012). "Monaco Grand Prix 2012: grid penalty denies Michael Schumacher of pole as Mark Webber leads the line". Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 23 March 2018. Retrieved 22 March 2018. Sport, Telegraph (27 May 2012). "Monaco Grand Prix 2012: bittersweet weekend for Mercedes as Rosberg shines and Schumacher's bad luck continues". Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 23 March 2018. Retrieved 22 March 2018. Morland, Greg (30 November 2012). "Top ten: Schumacher comeback moments". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (25 June 2012). "Schumacher is oldest driver on podium since 1970". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Conclusions from the German GP". Sky Sports. BSkyB. 23 July 2012. Archived from the original on 26 July 2012. Retrieved 24 July 2012. "300 up for seven-time champion Schumacher in Belgian Grand Prix". CNN. 30 August 2012. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Hallam, Mark (30 August 2012). "Schumi and Spa". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (2 September 2012). "Button storms to Spa win after first-lap shunt". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Noble, Jonathan (28 September 2012). "Schumacher's indecision prompted Mercedes to chase Hamilton". Autosport. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 1 October 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2012. "Schumacher announces Formula One retirement". Formula One Administration. 4 October 2012. Archived from the original on 6 October 2012. Retrieved 4 October 2012. Andrew, Andrew (5 October 2012). "Michael Schumacher crashes during Japanese Grand Prix practice". The Independent. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Schumacher Ready To Go 'Home' After Retirement". Speed. Speed Channel, Inc. GMM. 14 October 2012. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2012. Collantine, Keith (26 November 2012). "Schumacher finishes his F1 career as he started it". RaceFans. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher". RaceFans. 15 February 2006. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Updated 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: postscript (link) Beer, Matt; Tremayne, Sam (27 November 2012). "Red Bull thanks 'gracious' Schumacher for giving Vettel sixth". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "2012 F1 World Championship | Motorsport Database". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Freeman, Glenn (3 January 2019). "Michael Schumacher's top 10 F1 victories". Autosport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Goodwin, Ellis (28 December 2012). "Top moments of 2012, #13: End of the Schumacher era, again". Motorsport.com. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Even a tank can't halt schu now". JEC Composites. Archived from the original on 8 January 2007. Retrieved 8 November 2006. "Michael Schumacher Helmet Profile". theprancinghorse.co.uk. Archived from the original on 30 December 2006. Retrieved 10 February 2007. "Gallery: Michael Schumacher's F1 helmets". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 23 March 2018. Retrieved 22 March 2018. "Michael Schumacher Biography". MSchumacher.com. Archived from the original on 25 October 2006. Retrieved 25 October 2006. "Michael's winning helmet". PitPass. 21 October 2006. Archived from the original on 26 September 2007. Retrieved 7 November 2006. Noble, Jonathan (29 August 2011). "Behind the scenes at Spa". Autosport. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 12 October 2011. Retrieved 30 August 2011. Helmet supplier Schuberth provided him with a special 21-carat gold plated helmet, which he wore as a special one-off for the weekend. "Michael Schumacher 2012 300TH GP Commemorative F1 Replic". CM Helmets. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. "Is Schumacher the greatest driver of all time?". The Guardian. 18 October 2006. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Eichenberger, Reiner; Stadelmann, David (December 2009). "Who Is The Best Formula 1 Driver? An Economic Approach to Evaluating Talent" (PDF). Economic Analysis & Policy. 39 (3): 389–406. doi:10.1016/S0313-5926(09)50035-5. Retrieved 10 February 2024 – via University of Fribourg. "Michael Schumacher the greatest F1 driver of all time". ABC News. 30 December 2013. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Longman, Will (6 November 2023). "10 greatest Formula 1 drivers in history". Motorsport Tickets Blog. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Gaines, Cork; Thawaranont, Chay (21 July 2023). "Who is the greatest Formula 1 driver of all time?". Insider. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Ostly, Ayrton (3 January 2024). "Top three races of Michael Schumacher's career on legend's 55th birthday". USA Today. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Mann-Bryans, Mark (9 December 2021). "Michael Schumacher will always be greatest F1 driver, Sebastian Vettel claims". The Independent. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Schumacher hailed as 'greatest'". BBC Sport. 22 October 2006. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Mee, Lydia (21 January 2023). "Michael Schumacher Is The Greatest Driver In History According To Former Driver". Sport Illustrated. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Michael Schumacher is best driver this century – Ross Brawn". BBC Sport. 4 October 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Crebolder, Finley (12 December 2021). "Toto Wolff: Nobody will ever be greater than Michael Schumacher". PlanetF1. Retrieved 8 February 2024. McCarthy, Dan (27 February 2023). "Best F1 drivers of all time ranked". Radio Times. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (26 October 2022). "How Verstappen, Schumacher and Vettel's record 13 wins in a season compare". RaceFans. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Smith, Luke (3 November 2022). "How does Verstappen's win record compare to Schumacher and Vettel's seasons?". Motorsport.com. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (2 September 2017). "When will Schumacher's other records be broken?". RaceFans. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (15 November 2020). "F1's two seven-times champions: Hamilton and Schumacher's title wins compared". RaceFans. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Longman, Will (20 November 2023). "Formula 1 records: Most wins, pole positions and world championships". Motorsport Tickets Blog. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Hardyy, Ed (26 November 2023). "F1 records broken by Max Verstappen in 2023". Autosport.com. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Morland, Greg (19 June 2013). "Top ten: Unbeatable Formula One records". RaceFans. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Elson, James (21 July 2021). "2002: the year Michael Schumacher described as 'perfect'". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Masefield, Fraser (26 March 2014). "10 Formula 1 Records That Will Never Be Broken". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Collantine, Keith (9 November 2006). "F1 2006 Review: Michael Schumacher stats". RaceFans. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Eichenberger, Reiner; Stadelmann, David (December 2009). "Who Is The Best Formula 1 Driver? An Economic Approach to Evaluating Talent" (PDF). Economic Analysis & Policy. 39 (3): 389–406. doi:10.1016/S0313-5926(09)50035-5. Retrieved 10 February 2024 – via University of Fribourg. Bell, Andrew; Jones, Kelvyn; Sabel, Clive E.; Smith, James (1 June 2016). "Formula for success: Multilevel modelling of Formula One Driver and Constructor performance, 1950–2014". Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports. 12 (2): 99–112. doi:10.1515/jqas-2015-0050. hdl:1983/dd66908d-255b-47ec-94f1-e5e7acfeca49. ISSN 1559-0410. Retrieved 10 February 2024 – via ResearchGate. Paine, Neil (27 July 2018). "The Best Formula One Driver Might Be A Guy Who Hasn't Won Since 2013". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "2014 model-based driver rankings". F1metrics. 26 November 2014. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Who was the greatest F1 driver?". F1metrics. 18 July 2014. Retrieved 14 February 2024. Moore, Justin (25 May 2018). "Who's The Best Formula One Driver Of All Time?". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "The f1metrics top 100". F1metrics. 22 November 2019. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Hardy, Edward (22 January 2024). "Who are F1's 10 youngest world champions?". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "The 17 World Champions that belong in an exclusive Formula 1 club". PlanetF1. 21 May 2023. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Foster, Michelle (18 October 2019). "'Schumi could have won more if he hasn't joined Ferrari'". PlanetF1. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Freeman, Glenn (27 October 2020). "Nine lost F1 wins that stopped Schumacher reaching 100". The Race. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Woodhouse, Jamie (2 October 2020). "'Michael Schumacher beat all team-mates, unlike Lewis Hamilton'". PlanetF1. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Gretton, Matt (18 January 2021). "Formula 1 legends against their teammates: who has the best score?". GPblog.com. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Formula 1's greatest drivers. Number 4: Michael Schumacher". BBC Sport. 23 October 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Glendenning, Mark (1999). "Season 1999 Mid-Term Report". Atlas F1. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Glendenning, Mark (1999). "The Season 1999 End of Term Report". Atlas F1. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Barlow, Jason (6 April 2020). "Here are the 10 best ever Formula 1 drivers". Top Gear. Archived from the original on 7 April 2020. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Ehrungen" (in German). German Motor Sport Federation. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "Copperfield verzauberte BAMBI". BAMBI (in German). Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "Europäer vorn". Auto Bild (in German). Axel Springer. 8 November 2007. Archived from the original on 4 December 2021. Retrieved 28 February 2021. Azzopardi, Stephen (8 January 2020). "Nadal and Hosszu chosen by AIPS Europe journalists as best in Europe". Malta Sports Journalists. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2021. "FC Bayern: Große Ehre für Robert Lewandowski – Torjäger wird 'Europas Sportler des Jahres'". sport.de (in German). 27 December 2020. Archived from the original on 29 July 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2021. "Autosport Awards Videos | 1995". Autosport Awards. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "Full coverage from racing's big night out!". Autosport.com. 3 December 2000. Archived from the original on 14 May 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2021. Lüttgens, Markus (18 December 2016). "Sportler des Jahres: Michael Schumachers chaotische Anreise". Motorsport-Total.com (in German). Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "Schumacher voted German's sportsman of the century". Pitpass. 20 November 2004. Archived from the original on 23 July 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "Seehofers erster Auftritt als erster Mann im Staat". Die Welt (in German). 24 February 2012. Archived from the original on 3 June 2022. Retrieved 23 February 2021. "Michael Schumacher UNESCO Champion for sport". UNESCO. April 2002. Archived from the original on 24 October 2008. "Michael Schumacher". Laureus. Laureus World Sport Awards Limited. 2006. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 18 April 2007. "Marca Leyenda". Marca (in Spanish). 3 April 2018. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "French Newspaper Names German Driver Schumacher Voted World 'Champion of Champions' – 2003-12-29". Voice of America. 30 October 2009. Archived from the original on 10 April 2021. Retrieved 25 February 2021. "Inventato nel 1978, votano i giornalisti della Gazza: da Rono-Simeoni a oggi, ecco tutti i vincitori". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 31 December 2019. Archived from the original on 10 July 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "Schumacher Receives Bandini Award". Autosport. 22 May 2003. Archived from the original on 12 August 2019. Retrieved 30 August 2021. "Schumacher honoured by the FIA". Formula1.com. 11 December 2006. Archived from the original on 9 November 2007. Retrieved 15 December 2006. Venkatesh, Tejas (30 December 2022). "When Footballing legend Pele awarded 7-time F1 Champion Michael Schumacher ahead of his final race with Ferrari". The Sports Rush. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "Michael Schumacher, Prince of Asturias Award for Sports 2007". Prince of Asturias Foundation. Archived from the original on 14 May 2022. Retrieved 30 August 2021. "This is ROC". Race of Champions. Archived from the original on 20 May 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2021. Pryson, Mike (6 December 2017). "F1 legend Michael Schumacher's absence felt at inaugural FIA Hall of Fame inductions". Autoweek. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 22 February 2021. "Der Formel-1-Rekordweltmeister" (in German). Stiftung Deutsche Sporthilfe. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2021. "FIA Gala: Michael Schumacher honored – Corinna Schumacher's emotional appearance". NewsABC.net. 19 December 2020. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2021. Medina, Malagic (1 May 2014). "Former US Senator Bob Dole and Michael Schumacher are Honorary Citizens of Sarajevo". Sarajevo Times. Archived from the original on 17 January 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "Sarajlije o nazivu ulice po Schumacheru: "On je prijatelj BiH, to je zaslužio"". N1 (in Bosnian). 31 May 2022. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 1 June 2022. "Pogledajte kako izgleda mural posvećen Michaelu Schumacheru u Sarajevu". N1 (in Bosnian). 3 January 2022. Archived from the original on 1 June 2022. Retrieved 1 June 2022. "Schumacher awarded honorary citizenship of Maranello". Pitpass. 5 December 2006. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 23 February 2021. "Schumacher Cittadino Onorario di Modena" (in Italian). Comune di Modena. 7 February 2001. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 27 February 2021. Hallam, Mark (30 August 2012). "Schumacher's Spa milestones, from zero to 300". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 3 June 2022. Retrieved 23 February 2021. "Légion d'honneur pour Schumacher". Sport24 (in French). 29 April 2010. Archived from the original on 8 June 2022. Retrieved 22 February 2021. "Schumacher Sig. Michael". Quirinale (in Italian). Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2021. "Schumacher appointed ambassador of San Marino". Motorsport.com. 2 September 2003. Archived from the original on 6 June 2011. Retrieved 17 March 2010. "Schumacher becomes Swiss football ambassador". GPUpdate.net. 16 April 2007. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 1 February 2011. "Schumacher honoured by having a corner named after him at Nurburgring". Formula One. 21 July 2007. Archived from the original on 3 September 2007. Retrieved 21 July 2007. Andrew, Benson (2 March 2014). "Bahrain circuit honours Schumacher". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 23 September 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "Michael Schumacher erhält Staatspreis des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen" [Michael Schumacher receives the North Rhine-Westphalia State Prize]. Land.NRW (in German). 21 June 2022. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 22 June 2022. Mee, Lydia (29 December 2022). "What Happened to Michael Schumacher and What Have We Heard Since?". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Holt, Sarah (22 October 2006). "Who is the real Schumacher?". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 July 2007. Retrieved 22 October 2006. Sarne, Vernon B. (21 May 2012). "Michael Schumacher's house has its own vintage Shell fuel pump". Top Gear. Archived from the original on 24 December 2019. Retrieved 24 December 2019. Thompson, Danny (9 November 2019). "Corinna Schumacher gives first interview since husband Michael's tragic skiing accident in 2013". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on 31 August 2021. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "Schumacher half-brother looking for racing action". GrandPrix.com. 20 November 2001. Archived from the original on 22 November 2008. Retrieved 19 December 2008. Benson, Andrew (23 March 2021). "Formula 1 2021: Mick Schumacher ready to emulate 'idol' father". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 8 October 2022. Retrieved 31 August 2021. Sten-Ziemons, Andreas (30 December 2013). "Michael Schumacher's love of the limit". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 31 August 2021. Retrieved 31 August 2021. Holt, Sarah (28 May 2010). "F1 drivers banter over World Cup". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 31 August 2021. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "FIFA Fair Play: Playing for a better world". FIFA. 16 December 2004. Archived from the original on 18 September 2006. Retrieved 25 October 2006. "Schumacher in action on Wednesday". Pitpass. 19 October 2004. Archived from the original on 12 April 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2021. "Thoughts on Schumacher". BBC Sport. 10 September 2006. Archived from the original on 7 May 2007. Retrieved 25 October 2006. "Michael Schumacher: "I'm a great football fan"". FIFA. 1 August 2000. Archived from the original on 4 July 2020. Retrieved 13 May 2020. Ochs, Martina (15 February 2016). "Das Ende der Stille" [The end of the silence]. GALA.de (in German). Archived from the original on 17 December 2021. Retrieved 17 December 2021. "Schumacher 'revealed' as the Stig". BBC News. 21 June 2009. Archived from the original on 7 November 2020. Retrieved 22 June 2009. "F1: Schumacher completes a stint as Top Gear Stig – SCHUMACHER". F1-Live.com. Archived from the original on 23 June 2009. Retrieved 8 August 2009. "Netflix's new Schumacher documentary to show 'multi-layered personality' of 7-time champion". Formula One Group. 30 July 2021. Archived from the original on 20 August 2021. Retrieved 20 August 2021. "Michael Schumacher, a UNESCO champion". UNESCO. 2002. Archived from the original on 21 February 2007. Retrieved 25 October 2006. "Michael Schumacher zum Ehrenbürger von Sarajevo ernannt". Nachrichten.at (in German). 30 April 2014. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2021. "The charitable side of Michael Schumacher". Newstalk. 30 December 2013. Archived from the original on 18 September 2022. Retrieved 4 March 2021. Cheema, Saad Bari (3 January 2014). "Keep the prayers coming for Michael Schumacher". The Express Tribune. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Michael gives $1m to flood victims". GrandPrix.com. 17 August 2002. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2021. "Michael Schumacher pledges 500,000 euros to flood fund". NDTV Sports. 19 June 2013. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2021. "Schumacher donates $10m relief aid". CNN. 4 January 2005. Archived from the original on 2 November 2006. Retrieved 24 October 2006. McAllister, Mike (11 November 2005). "My Sportsman: Michael Schumacher". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 17 September 2006. Retrieved 25 October 2006. Duff, Alex (10 September 2006). "Schumacher, Seven-Time Champion, to Quit Formula One (Update 1)". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 18 January 2007. "Clinton Foundation Donors". The Wall Street Journal. 18 December 2008. Archived from the original on 19 December 2008. Retrieved 18 December 2008. Sweney, Mark (4 July 2008). "Schumacher puts the brakes on drink-driving". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 15 December 2013. Retrieved 30 January 2009. Funk, Daniel; Karg, Adam (2020). Strategic Sport Marketing. Routledge. p. 275. ISBN 978-1-00025127-2. "Michael Schumacher (1969)". IDSIA. Archived from the original on 10 June 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. "The Celebrity 100". Forbes. 2005. Archived from the original on 25 October 2006. Retrieved 25 October 2006. "MOT: Schumacher slaps $11.9 m price on his head". AAP Sports News. 11 November 1999. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved 24 October 2006. "Drivers top the rich list". ESPN F1. Archived from the original on 9 December 2014. Retrieved 9 September 2014. Badenhausen, Kurt (13 December 2017). "The 25 Highest-Paid Athletes Of All Time". Forbes. Archived from the original on 18 December 2018. Retrieved 18 December 2018. "Michael Schumacher's Skiing Accident in Méribel – Locations". X10. Archived from the original on 24 February 2014. Retrieved 24 February 2014. "Schumacher Head Injury Skiing". Snow Industry News. 29 December 2013. Archived from the original on 27 April 2015. Retrieved 20 April 2015. Azad, Anand Veeravagu,Tej (3 January 2014). "Brain Bleed: Why Michael Schumacher's Helmet Wasn't Enough". The Daily Beast. Retrieved 10 February 2024.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Michael Schumacher's Head Injury and Recovery Today | ANA". Advanced Neurosurgery Associates. 20 December 2020. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Noble, Jonathan (30 December 2013). "Helmet helped protect Michael Schumacher in skiing accident". Autosport. Haymarket Publishing. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2013. Whaling, James (26 November 2017). "What we know about Michael Schumacher after horror ski accident". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on 18 December 2017. Retrieved 18 December 2017. "Michael Schumacher 'still in wake-up phase'". CNN. 7 March 2014. Archived from the original on 11 March 2014. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Noble, Jonathan (30 December 2013). "Doctors say Michael Schumacher's condition 'extremely serious'". Autosport. Haymarket Publishing. Archived from the original on 30 December 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2013. "Schumacher has 'conscious moments' – agent". BBC News. 4 April 2014. Archived from the original on 5 April 2014. Retrieved 4 April 2014. Schmuck, Pascal; Nicollier, Marie (16 June 2014). "Schumacher entre les mains des neurologues du CHUV". 24 Heures (in French). Archived from the original on 18 August 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2014. "Michael Schumacher leaves hospital for recovery at home". BBC News. 9 September 2014. Archived from the original on 22 August 2019. Retrieved 9 September 2014. "What happened to Michael Schumacher in 2013 and what all we know since then?". The Economic Times. 30 December 2022. ISSN 0013-0389. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Williams, Alexandra (19 November 2014). "Michael Schumacher: 'paralysed and in a wheelchair'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 4 August 2019. Retrieved 19 November 2014. Manalo, Komfie (26 May 2015). "Michael Schumacher Latest Health Update: F1 Racing Superstar Improving 17 Months After Ski Accident". Archived from the original on 27 May 2015. Retrieved 27 May 2015. "Michael Schumacher 'cannot walk', German court hears". BBC News. 19 September 2016. Archived from the original on 21 September 2016. Retrieved 21 September 2016. Chazan, David (30 July 2019). "Michael Schumacher 'making progress' in recovery from severe head injuries". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 30 July 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2019. Samuel, Henry (11 September 2019). "Michael Schumacher 'conscious' after pioneering treatment in Paris". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 12 September 2019. Retrieved 12 September 2019. "Schumachers plan legal action after AI 'interview'". BBC Sport. 20 April 2023. Archived from the original on 20 April 2023. Retrieved 20 April 2023. "Magazine editor sacked over AI-generated Michael Schumacher interview". The Observer. 22 April 2023. ISSN 0029-7712. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 22 April 2023. "Michael Schumacher | Racing career profile". Driver Database. Archived from the original on 1 January 2023. Retrieved 16 February 2023. "Michael Schumacher". MotorSport. 2020. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 1 December 2020. Hilton, Christopher (2006). Michael Schumacher: The Whole Story. Haynes Publishing. ISBN 1-84425-008-3. "Complete Archive of Michael Schumacher". Racing Sports Cars. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "Michael Schumacher – Involvement". StatsF1. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "Michael Schumacher". ESPN. Archived from the original on 16 May 2015. Retrieved 1 December 2020. General Allen, James (1999). Michael Schumacher: Driven to Extremes. Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-553-81214-5. Allen, James (2007). Edge of Greatness. Headline. ISBN 978-0-7553-1678-6. Collings, Timothy (2004). The Piranha Club. Virgin Books. ISBN 978-0-7535-0965-4. Collings, Timothy (2005). Team Schumacher. Highdown. ISBN 978-1-905156-03-0. Domenjoz, Luc (2002). Michael Schumacher: Rise of a genius. Parragon. ISBN 978-0-7525-9228-2. Henry, Alan, ed. (1992). Autocourse 1992–93. Hazleton Publishing. ISBN 978-0-905138-96-1. Henry, Alan (1996). Wheel to Wheel: Great Duels of Formula One Racing. Weidenfeld Nicolson Illustrated. ISBN 978-0-7538-0522-0. Hilton, Christopher (2003). Michael Schumacher: The greatest of all. Haynes. ISBN 978-1-84425-044-8. Hilton, Christopher (2006). Michael Schumacher: The Whole Story. Haynes. ISBN 978-1-84425-008-0. Kehm, Sabine (2003). Michael Schumacher. Driving Force. Random House. ISBN 978-0-09-189435-1. Matchett, Steve (1995). Life in the Fast Lane: The Story of the Benetton Grand Prix Year. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-81610-2. Matchett, Steve (1999). The Mechanic's Tale: Life in the Pit Lanes of Formula One. Osceola, Wisconsin: MBI Pub. ISBN 978-0-7603-0754-0. Williams, Richard (1999). The Death of Ayrton Senna. Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-0-7475-4495-1. Michael Schumacher at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Official website Michael Schumacher career summary at DriverDB.com Michael Schumacher driver statistics at Racing-Reference Kartcenter and Museum Kartteam Kaiser-Schumacher-Muchow Formula1.com Profile