Yakut /jəˈkuːt/ yə-KOOT, also known as Yakutian, Sakha, Saqa or Saxa (Yakut: саха тыла), is a Turkic language belonging to Siberian Turkic branch and spoken by around 450,000 native speakers, primarily the ethnic Yakuts and one of the official languages of Sakha (Yakutia), a federal republic in the Russian Federation. The Yakut language differs from all other Turkic languages in the presence of a layer of vocabulary of unclear origin (possibly Paleo-Siberian). There is also a large number of words of Mongolian origin related to ancient borrowings, as well as numerous recent borrowings from Russian. Like other Turkic languages and their ancestor Proto-Turkic, Yakut is an agglutinative language and features vowel harmony. Yakut is a member of the Northeastern Common Turkic family of languages, which also includes Shor, Tuvan and Dolgan. Like most Turkic languages, Yakut has vowel harmony, is agglutinative and has no grammatical gender. Word order is usually subject–object–verb. Yakut has been influenced by Tungusic and Mongolian languages. Historically, Yakut left the community of Common Turkic speakers relatively early. Due to this, it diverges in many ways from other Turkic languages and mutual intelligibility between Yakut and other Turkic languages is low. Nevertheless, Yakut contains many features which are important for the reconstruction of Proto-Turkic, such as the preservation of long vowels. Yakut is spoken mainly in the Sakha Republic. It is also used by ethnic Yakuts in Khabarovsk Region and a small diaspora in other parts of the Russian Federation, Turkey, and other parts of the world. Dolgan, a close relative of Yakut, which formerly was considered by some a dialect of Yakut, is spoken by Dolgans in Krasnoyarsk Region. Yakut is widely used as a lingua franca by other ethnic minorities in the Sakha Republic – more Dolgans, Evenks, Evens and Yukagirs speak Yakut than their own languages. About 8% of the people of other ethnicities than Yakut living in Sakha claimed knowledge of the Yakut language during the 2002 census. Yakut has the following consonants phonemes, where the IPA value is provided in slashes '//' and the native script value is provided in bold followed by the romanization in parentheses. /n, t, d/ are laminal denti-alveolar [n̪, t̪, d̪], whereas /s, l, ɾ/ are alveolar [s, l, ɾ]. The nasal glide /ȷ̃/ is not distinguished from /j/ in the orthography, where both are written as ⟨й⟩. Thus айыы can be ayïï [ajɯː] 'deed, creation, work' or aỹïï [aȷ̃ɯː] 'sin, transgression.' The nasal glide /ȷ̃/ has a very restricted distribution, appearing in very few words. /ɾ/ is pronounced as a flap /ɾ/ between vowels, e.g. орон (oron) [oɾon] 'place', and as a trill at the end of words, e.g. тур (tur) [tur] 'stand'. /ɾ/ does not occur at the beginning of words in native Yakut words; borrowed Russian words with onset /ɾ/ are usually rendered with an epenthetic vowel, e.g. Russian рама (rama) > Yakut араама (araama) 'frame'. Yakut is in many ways phonologically unique among the Turkic languages. Yakut and the closely related Dolgan language are the only Turkic languages without hushing sibilants. Additionally, no known Turkic languages other than Yakut and Khorasani Turkic have the palatal nasal /ɲ/. Consonants at morpheme boundaries undergo extensive assimilation, both progressive and regressive. All suffixes possess numerous allomorphs. For suffixes which begin with a consonant, the surface form of the consonant is conditioned on the stem-final segment. There are four such archiphonemic consonants: G, B, T, and L. Examples of each are provided in the following table for the suffixes -GIt (second-person plural possessive suffix, oɣoɣut 'your [pl.] child'), -BIt (first-person plural possessive suffix, oɣobut, 'our child'), -TA (partitive case suffix, tiiste 'some teeth'), -LARA (third-person plural possessive suffix, oɣoloro 'their child'). Note that the alternation in the vowels is governed by vowel harmony (see the main article and the below section). Regressive velarization. Regressive labialization. There is an additional regular morphophonological pattern for [t]-final stems: they assimilate in place of articulation with an immediately following labial or velar. For example at 'horse' > akkït 'your [pl.] horse', > appït 'our horse'. Yakut initial s- corresponds to initial h- in Dolgan and played an important operative rule in the development of proto-Yakut, ultimately resulting in initial Ø- < *h- < *s- (example: Dolgan huoq and Yakut suox, both meaning "not").[clarification needed] The historical change of *s > h, known as debuccalization, is a common sound-change across the world's languages, being characteristic of such languages as Greek and Indo-Iranian in their development from Proto-Indo-European, as well as such Turkic languages as Bashkir, e.g. höt 'milk' < *süt. Debuccalization of /s/ to /h/ is also found as a diachronic change from Proto-Celtic to Brittonic, and has actually become a synchronic grammaticalised feature called lenition in the related Goidelic languages (Irish, Scottish, and Manx). Debuccalization is also an active phonological process in modern Yakut. Intervocalically the phoneme /s/ becomes [h]. For example the /s/ in кыыс (kïïs) 'girl' becomes [h] between vowels: a. kïïs girl > > kïïh-ïm girl-POSS.1SG kïïs > kïïh-ïm girl > girl-POSS.1SG 'girl; daughter' > 'my daughter' Yakut has twenty phonemic vowels: eight short vowels, eight long vowels, and four diphthongs. The following table give broad transcriptions for each vowel phoneme, as well as the native script bold and romanization in italics: The long vowel phonemes /eː/, /ɔː/, and /øː/ appear in very few words and are thus considered marginal phonemes. Note that these vowels are extremely broad. Narrower transcriptions transcribe the high back non-front vowel ы as central /ɨ/. The front non-high unrounded open vowel in э, ээ, and иэ are more accurately [ɛ], [ɛː], [iɛ], respectively. ы is occasionally Romanized as y, consistent with the BGN/PCGN romanization of Russian Cyrillic. Turkologists and Altaicists tend to transcribe the vowel as ï, or as ɨ. Some authors romanize long vowels with a macron (e.g. /iː/ ī, /yː/ ǖ) or with a colon (e.g. /iː/ i:/iː, /yː/, ü:/üː). Like other Turkic languages, a characteristic feature of Yakut is progressive vowel harmony. Most root words obey vowel harmony, for example in кэлин (kelin) 'back', all the vowels are front and unrounded. Yakut's vowel harmony in suffixes is the most complex system in the Turkic family. Vowel harmony is an assimilation process where vowels in one syllable take on certain features of vowels in the preceding syllable. In Yakut, subsequent vowels all take on frontness and all non-low vowels take on lip rounding of preceding syllables' vowels. There are two main rules of vowel harmony: Frontness/backness harmony: Front vowels are always followed by front vowels. Back vowels are always followed by back vowels. Rounding harmony: Unrounded vowels are always followed by unrounded vowels. Close rounded vowels always occur after close rounded vowels. Open unrounded vowels do not assimilate in rounding with close rounded vowels. The quality of the diphthongs /ie, ïa, uo, üö/ for the purposes of vowel harmony is determined by the first segment in the diphthong. Taken together, these rules mean that the pattern of subsequent syllables in Yakut is entirely predictable, and all words will follow the following pattern: Like the consonant assimilation rules above, suffixes display numerous allomorphs determined by the stem they attach to. There are two archiphoneme vowels I (an underlyingly high vowel) and A (an underlyingly low vowel). Examples of I can be seen in the first-person singular possessive agreement suffix -(I)m: as in (a): The underlyingly low vowel phoneme A is represented through the third-person singular agreement suffix -(t)A in (b): After three earlier phases of development, Yakut is currently written using the Cyrillic script: the modern Yakut alphabet, established in 1939 by the Soviet Union, consists of all the Russian characters with five additional letters for phonemes not present in Russian: Ҕҕ, Ҥҥ, Өө, Һһ, Үү, as follows: Long vowels are represented through the doubling of vowels, e.g. үүт (üüt) /yːt/ 'milk,' a practice that many scholars follow in Romanizations of the language. The full Yakut alphabet contains letters for consonant phonemes not present in native words (and thus not indicated in the phonology tables above): the letters В /v/, Е /(j)e/, Ё /jo|/, Ж /ʒ/, З /z/, Ф /f/, Ц /t͡s/, Ш /ʃ/, Щ /ɕː/, Ъ, Ю /ju/, Я /ja/ are used exclusively in Russian loanwords. In addition, in native Yakut words, the soft sign ⟨Ь⟩ is used exclusively in the digraphs ⟨дь⟩ and ⟨нь⟩. There are numerous conventions for the Romanization of Yakut. Bibliographic sources and libraries typically use the ALA-LC Romanization tables for non-Slavic languages in Cyrillic script. Linguists often employ Turkological standards for transliteration, or a mixture of Turkological standards and the IPA. In addition, others employ Turkish orthography. Comparison of some of these systems can be seen in the following: (a) дьон /d͡ʒon/ people дьон /d͡ʒon/ people 'people' (b) айыы /ajɯː/ creation айыы /ajɯː/ creation 'creation' (c) бу /bu DEM ыт ɯt dog аттааҕар at.taːɣar horse-COMP түргэнник tyrgɛn.nɪk fast-ADV сүүрэр syːrɛr/ run-PRES бу ыт аттааҕар түргэнник сүүрэр /bu ɯt at.taːɣar tyrgɛn.nɪk syːrɛr/ DEM dog horse-COMP fast-ADV run-PRES 'This dog runs faster than a horse' (d) эһэ /ɛhɛ bear бөрөтөөҕөр bøɾøtøːɣør wolf-COMP күүстээх kyːstɛːχ/ strong-have эһэ бөрөтөөҕөр күүстээх /ɛhɛ bøɾøtøːɣør kyːstɛːχ/ bear wolf-COMP strong-have 'A bear is stronger than a wolf' The typical word order can be summarized as subject – adverb – object – verb; possessor – possessed; adjective – noun. Personal pronouns in Yakut distinguish between first, second, and third persons and singular and plural number. Cognate with Turkish kendi (self) Although nouns have no gender, the pronoun system distinguishes between human and non-human in the third person, using кини (kini, 'he/she') to refer to human beings and ол (ol, 'it') to refer to all other things. Nouns have plural and singular forms. The plural is formed with the suffix /-LAr/, which may surface as -лар (-lar), -лэр (-ler), -лөр (-lör), -лор (-lor), -тар (-tar), -тэр (-ter), -төр (-tör), -тор (-tor), -дар (-dar), -дэр (-der), -дөр (-dör), -дор (-dor), -нар (-nar), -нэр (-ner), -нөр (-nör), or -нор (-nor), depending on the preceding consonants and vowels. The plural is used only when referring to a number of things collectively, not when specifying an amount. Nouns have no gender. baydar 'rich people' and ederder 'young' people are examples of predicative adjectives (i.e. baay 'rich', eder 'young') being pluralized There is a handful of irregular plural nouns, e.g. уол (uol) 'boy; son' > уолаттар (uolattar), кыыс (kïïs) 'girl; daughter' > кыыргыттар (kïïrgïttar). Only Sakha (Yakut) has a rich case system that differs markedly from all the other Siberian Turkic languages. It has retained the ancient comitative case from Old Turkic (due to strong influence from Mongolian) while in other Turkic languages, the old comitative has become an instrumental case. However, in Sakha language the Old Turkic locative case has come to denote partitive case, thus leaving no case form for the function of locative. Furthermore, (in addition to locative,) genitive and equative cases are lost as well. Yakut has eight grammatical cases: nominative (unmarked), accusative -(n)I, dative -GA, partitive -TA, ablative -(t)tan, instrumental -(I)nAn, comitative -LIIn, and comparative -TAAɣAr. Examples of these are shown in the following table for a vowel-final stem eye 'peace' and a consonant-final stem uot 'fire': Sakha partitive suffix is believed by some linguists to be an innovation stemming from the influence of Evenki which led the Old Turkic locative suffix to assume partitive function in Sakha; no other Turkic language has partitive suffix save for Khalaj and (nearly-extinct) Tofa. Sakha partitive is similar to the corresponding Finnish partitive case. The Ablative suffix appears as -TAn following a consonant and -TTAn following a vowel. Clear examples of the former are ox 'arrow' → oxto 'from an/the arrow', oxtorton 'from (the) arrows'. The partitive object case indicates that just a part of an object is affected, e.g.: Uː-ta water-PTV is! drink-IMP.2SG Uː-ta is! water-PTV drink-IMP.2SG Drink some water! The corresponding expression below with the object in the accusative denotes wholeness: Uː-nu water-ACC. is! drink-IMP.2SG Uː-nu is! water-ACC. drink-IMP.2SG Drink [all] the water! The partitive is only used in imperative or necessitative expressions, e.g. Uː-ta water-PT a-γal-ϊaχ-χa bring-PRO-DAT naːda. necessary. Uː-ta a-γal-ϊaχ-χa naːda. water-PT bring-PRO-DAT necessary. One has to bring some water. Note the word naːda is borrowed from Russian надо (must). A notable detail about Yakut case is the absence of the genitive, a feature which some argue is due to historical contact with Evenki (a Tungusic language), the language with which Sakha (i.e. Yakut) was in most intensive contact. Possessors are unmarked, with the possessive relationship only being realized on the possessed noun itself either through the possessive suffix (if the subject is a pronoun) or through partitive case suffix (if the subject is any other nominal). For example, in (a) the first-person pronoun subjects are not marked for genitive case; neither do full nominal subjects (possessors) receive any marking, as shown in (b): a. min 1SG.NOM oɣo-m child-POSS.1SG / / bihigi 1PL.NOM oɣo-but child-POSS.1PL min oɣo-m / bihigi oɣo-but 1SG.NOM child-POSS.1SG / 1PL.NOM child-POSS.1PL 'my son' / 'our child' b. Masha Masha.NOM aɣa-ta father-PTV.3SG Masha aɣa-ta Masha.NOM father-PTV.3SG 'Masha's father' The Sakha yes–no question marker is enclitic duo or du:, whereas almost all other Turkic languages use markers of the type -mI, compare: Күөрэгэй kyœregej lark-NOM ырыатын ïrïa-tï-n song-3SG.POSS-ACC истэҕин ist-e-ɣin hear-PRS-2SG дуо? =duo? =Q Күөрэгэй ырыатын истэҕин дуо? kyœregej ïrïa-tï-n ist-e-ɣin =duo? lark-NOM song-3SG.POSS-ACC hear-PRS-2SG =Q Do you hear the song of larks? and the same sentence in Uzbek (note the question suffix -mi in contrast to Sakha): To’rg’ay jirini eshityapsanmi? Question words in Yakut remain in-situ; they do not move to the front of the sentence. Sample question words include: туох (tuox) 'what', ким (kim) 'who', хайдах (xajdax) 'how', хас (xas) 'how much; how many', ханна (xanna) 'where', and ханнык (xannïk) 'which'. Sakha has a large number of Mongolian loanwords, representing around 13% of its vocabulary (including terms pertaining to kinship and body parts). Despite the close contact with Evenki, Sakha has quite a small number of loanwords from that language. The Yakut have a tradition of oral epic in their language called "Olonkho", traditionally performed by skilled performers. The subject matter is based on Yakut mythology and legends. Versions of many Olonkho poems have been written down and translated since the 19th century, but only a very few older performers of the oral Olonkho tradition are still alive. They have begun a program to teach young people to sing this in their language and revive it, though in a modified form. The first printing in Yakut was a part of a book by Nicolaas Witsen published in 1692 in Amsterdam. In 2005, Marianne Beerle-Moor, director of the Institute for Bible Translation, Russia/CIS, was awarded the Order of Civil Valour by the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) for the translation of the New Testament into Yakut. Probably the first-ever Islamic book written in Sakha language was published in 2012 entitled "Билсин: Ислам" ("Get to know: Islam"). Article 1 of Universal Declaration of Human Rights (with footnotes on etymologies of some words): Borrowed from Mongolian зон The root of the word, быраап, is derived from Russian право The root of this loanword, суобас, is from Russian совесть - conscience. Russia portal Languages portal Yakuts Dolgan language Semyon Novgorodov – the inventor of the first IPA-based Yakut alphabet "Sakha language". Britannica. "Yakut". Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary. Forsyth 1994, p.56: "Their language...Turkic in its vocabulary and grammar, shows the influence of both Tungus and Mongolian.". Johanson 2021, pp. 20, 24. Stachowski & Menz 1998. Johanson 2021, p. 19. Antonov 1997. Russian Census 2002. 6. Владение языками (кроме русского) населением отдельных национальностей по республикам, автономной области и автономным округам Российской Федерации Archived 2006-11-04 at the Wayback Machine (Knowledge of languages other than Russian by the population of republics, autonomous oblast and autonomous districts) (in Russian) Pakendorf & Stapert 2020. Krueger 1962, p. 67. Pakendorf & Stapert 2020, p. 432. Krueger 1962, pp. 68–9. Kharitonov 1947, p. 63. Kharitonov 1947, p. 64. Stachowski & Menz 1998, p. 420. Ubrjatova, E. I. 1960 Opyt sravnitel'nogo izuc˙enija fonetic˙eskix osobennostej naselenija nekotoryx rajonov Jakutskoj ASSR. Moscow. 1985. Jazyk noril'skix dolgan. Novosibirsk: "Nauka" SO. In Tungusic Languages 2 (2): 1–32. Historical Aspects of Yakut (Saxa) Phonology. Gregory D. S. Anderson. University of Chicago. Johanson 2021, p. 36. Johanson 2021, p. 283. Pakendorf & Stapert 2020, p. 433; Anderson 1998. Vinokurova 2005; Baker & Vinokurova 2010. Robbeets & Savalyev 2020, p. lxxxii; Johanson 2021; Krueger 1962; Stachowski & Menz 1998. Anderson 1998. Pakendorf 2007; Pakendorf & Stapert 2020 Johanson 2021, p. 315. Krueger 1962, pp. 48–9; Stachowski & Menz 1998, p. 419. Johanson 2021, p. 316. -(I)m indicates that this suffix appears as -m in vowel-final words (e.g. oɣo 'child' > oɣom 'my child'. Consonants in parentheses indicate that the suffix loses the consonant in consonant-final words, e.g. uol 'son' > uola 'his/her son.' Krueger 1962. Vinokurova 2005. Petrova 2011. "Non-Slavic languages (in Cyrillic Script)" (PDF). Library of Congress. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 3, 2021. Retrieved 31 March 2022. Krueger 1962; Stachowski & Menz 1998; Johanson 2021; Menz & Monastyrev 2022 Kirişçioğlu 1999. "дьон". sakhatyla.ru. Retrieved April 2, 2022. "айыы". sakhatyla.ru. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Krueger 1962, p. 89. "Romanization" (PDF). August 2019. Kirişçioğlu, M. Fatih (1999). Saha (Yakut) Türkçesi Grameri. Ankara: Türk Dil Kurumu. ISBN 975-16-0587-3. Krueger 1962; Stachowski & Menz 1998; Vinokurova 2005 Suihkonen, Pirkko; Comrie, Bernard; Solovyev, Valery (18 July 2012). Argument Structure and Grammatical Relations. John Benjamins. p. 205. ISBN 9789027274717. Bárány, András; Biberauer, Theresa; Douglas, Jamie; Vikner, Sten (28 May 2021). Syntactic architecture and its consequences III. BoD – Books on Demand. p. 54. ISBN 9783985540044. Krueger 1962; Stachowski & Menz 1998; Baker & Vinokurova 2010; Johanson 2021. Pakendorf 2007. Baker & Vinokurova 2010. Robin Harris. 2012. Sitting "under the mouth": decline and revitalization in the Sakha epic tradition "Olonkho". Doctoral dissertation, University of Georgia. "Предпосылки возникновения якутской книги". Память Якутии. Retrieved 2014-10-29. "People". Institute for Bible Translation, Russia/CIS. Retrieved 5 October 2016. "В Якутии издали книгу об исламе на языке саха". Anderson, Gregory D. S. (1998). "Historical Aspects of Yakut (Saxa) Phonology". Turkic Languages. 2 (2): 1–32. Antonov, N. K. (1997). Tenshev, E. R. (ed.). Yazyki mira (seriya knig) (in Russian). Indrik (izdatelstvo). pp. 513–524. ISBN 5-85759-061-2. Baker, Mark C; Vinokurova, Nadya (2010). "Two modalities of case assignment: case in Sakha". Natural Language and Linguistic Theory. 28 (3): 593–642. doi:10.1007/s11049-010-9105-1. S2CID 18614663. Forsyth, James (1994). A History of the Peoples of Siberia: Russia's North Asian Colony 1581-1990. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521477710. Johanson, Lars (2021). Turkic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 20, 24. Kharitonov, L. N. (1947). Samouchitel' jakutskogo jazyka (in Russian). Jakutskoe knizhnoe izdatel'stvo. Kirişçioğlu, M. Fatih (1999). Saha (Yakut) Türkçesi Grameri (in Turkish). Ankara: Türk Dil Kurumu. ISBN 975-16-0587-3. Krueger, John R. (1962). Yakut Manual. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Menz, Astrid; Monastyrev, Vladimir (2022). "Yakut". In Johanson, Lars; Csató, Éva Á. (eds.). The Turkic Languages (Second ed.). Routledge. pp. 444–59. doi:10.4324/9781003243809. ISBN 978-0-415-73856-9. S2CID 243795171. Robbeets, Martine; Savalyev, Alexander (2020). "Romanization Conventions". In Robbeets, Martine; Savalyev, Alexander (eds.). The Oxford Guide to the Transeurasian Languages. Oxford University Press. pp. lii–lxxxii. Pakendorf, Brigitte (2007). Contact in the prehistory of the Sakha (Yakuts): Linguistic and genetic perspectives (Thesis). Universiteit Leiden. Pakendorf, Brigitte; Stapert, Eugénie (2020). "Sakha and Dolgan, the North Siberian Turkic Languages". In Robbeets, Martine; Savalyev, Alexander (eds.). The Oxford Guide to the Transeurasian Languages. Oxford University Press. pp. 430–45. doi:10.1093/oso/9780198804628.003.0027. ISBN 978-0-19-880462-8. Petrova, Nyurguyana (2011). Lexicon and Clause-Linkage Properties of the Converbal Constructions in Sakha (Yakut) (Thesis). University of Buffalo. Stachowski, Marek; Menz, Astrid (1998). "Yakut". In Johanson, Lars; Csató, Éva Á. (eds.). The Turkic Languages. Routledge. Ubryatova, E.I., ed. (1980). Grammatika sovremennogo jakutskogo literaturnogo jazyka. Moscow: Nauka. Vinokurova, Nadezhda (2005). Lexical Categories and Argument Structure: A study with reference to Sakha (Thesis). Universiteit Utrecht. Yakut language at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Phrasebook from Wikivoyage Yakut edition of Wikipedia Data from Wikidata Yakut language test of Wiktionary at Wikimedia Incubator Yakut language test of Wikinews at Wikimedia Incubator Yakut Vocabulary List (from the World Loanword Database) Yakut thematic vocabulary lists [1] "Comparison of Yakut and Mongolian vocabulary". Archived from the original on February 5, 2008. Yakut texts with Russian translations in the Internet Archive – heroic poetry, fairy tales, legends, proverbs, etc. Sakhalyy suruk – Yakut Unicode fonts and Keyboard Layouts for PC Sakhatyla.ru – On-line Yakut–Russian, Russian–Yakut dictionary Yakut–English Dictionary Archived April 2, 2022, at the Wayback Machine BGN/PCGN romanization tool for Yakut Sakha Open World Archived 2006-06-19 at the Wayback Machine – MP3's of Sakha Radio Sakha Open World – Орто Дойду Archived 2017-09-22 at the Wayback Machine – A platform to promote the Yakut Language on the web; News, Lyrics, Music, Fonts, Forum, VideoNews (in Yakut, Unicode) Baayaga village website – news and stories about and by the people of Baayaga (in Yakut) Kyym.ru – site of Yakut newspaper НВК Саха (NVK Sakha) Yakut language news channel on YouTube