Khazar University (Azerbaijani: Xəzər Universiteti, which directly translates as Caspian University) is a private university located in Baku, Azerbaijan. Khazar University owns four campuses in the city of Baku and two campuses in regions of Azerbaijan. Neftchilar Campus Neftchilar Campus Downtown Campus Neftchilar Campus Downtown Campus Baku Dunya School Campus – Education complex for “Dunya” School, also Khazar University School of Education's Internship Center, Sports Center, Dormitory and Technopark Sumgayit Dunya School Campus Ganja Dunya School Campus Buzovna Conference and Leisure Center Khazar University was founded in March 1991 by Hamlet Isakhanli, the university became one of the first private universities in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia and the first in Azerbaijan to introduce Western-style, research-oriented higher education. Isakhanli formed Khazar in the interest of reforming the previous system of higher education under Soviet rule. In Azerbaijan, Khazar University is providing Western-style education on all levels: undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral. Khazar University participates in foreign student exchange programs. It also runs a lab. The Department of History and Archaeology was established in June 1993 and was formerly known as the Department of History. It falls within the School of Humanities, Education and Social Sciences. The institute was formerly known as the Center for International and Strategic Studies. The Khazar University Dictionary and Encyclopedia Center, located on the campus of Khazar University in Baku, Azerbaijan, has been in operation since April 1996. The center is directed by Professor Tofik Abaskuliyev. The center's main functions are to perform linguistic and lexicological research and to prepare, evaluate and publish bilingual, multilingual and encyclopedic dictionaries. Adnan Hajizadeh, blogger and youth activist Nargiz Birk-Petersen, television commentator Nigar Jamal, winner of Eurovision 2011 The university is a member of the Caucasus University Association. "QS World University Rankings-Emerging Europe & Central Asia". Retrieved 15 January 2023. "Khazar University". www.khazar.org. "Hamlet Isakhanli resigns from post of Khazar University's rector". Emily Van Buskirk, "Current Trends in Education in Azerbaijan - A discussion with Professor Hamlet Isakhanli Archived 2006-09-01 at the Wayback Machine", Caspian Studies Program, Harvard University, April 25, 2001, Accessed on April 14, 2006 "Khazar University". Top Universities. "Search | Ranking Web of Universities: Webometrics ranks 30000 institutions". "Xezer Universiteti 2003 Ranking & Review | uniRank". www.4icu.org. "Institutes and Centers". Archived from the original on 2017-05-10. Retrieved 2020-09-06. "Welcome to Khazar University". Archived from the original on 2010-07-15. Retrieved 2010-12-03. "Welcome to Khazar University". Archived from the original on 2010-07-15. Retrieved 2010-12-03. Tüm Uyeler. kunib.com