Sir Michael Philip Jagger (born 26 July 1943) is an English singer, songwriter, actor, filmmaker, and dancer. He is the front man and one of the founder members of the rock band the Rolling Stones. Jagger has written most of the band's songs alongside lead guitarist Keith Richards; their songwriting partnership is one of the most successful in history, and they continue to collaborate musically. His career has spanned over six decades, and he has been widely described as one of the most popular and influential front men in the history of rock music. His distinctive voice and energetic live performances, along with Richards' guitar style, have been the Rolling Stones' trademark throughout the band's career. Jagger gained notoriety for his romantic involvements and illicit drug use, and has often been portrayed as a countercultural figure. Jagger was born and grew up in Dartford. He studied at the London School of Economics before abandoning his studies to focus on his career with the Rolling Stones. In the late 1960s, Jagger starred in the films Performance (1970) and Ned Kelly (1970), to mixed receptions. Beginning in the 1980s, he released a number of solo works, including four albums and the single "Dancing in the Street", a 1985 duet with David Bowie that reached No. 1 in the UK and Australia and was a top-ten hit in other countries. In the 2000s, Jagger co-founded a film production company, Jagged Films, and produced feature films through the company beginning with the 2001 historical drama Enigma. He was also a member of the supergroup SuperHeavy from 2009 to 2011. Although relationships with his bandmates, particularly Richards, deteriorated during the 1980s, Jagger has always found more success with the Rolling Stones than with his solo and side projects. He was married to Bianca Pérez-Mora Macias from 1971 to 1978, and has had several other relationships; he has eight children with five women. In 1989, Jagger was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and, in 2004, into the UK Music Hall of Fame with the Rolling Stones. As a member of the Rolling Stones and as a solo artist, he reached No. 1 on the UK and US singles charts with 13 singles, the top 10 with 32 singles and the top 40 with 70 singles. In 2003, he was knighted for his services to popular music. The genus Jaggermeryx naida and the type species Aegrotocatellus jaggeri are named for him. Jagger is credited with being a trailblazer in pop music and with bringing a style and sex appeal to rock and roll that have been imitated and proven influential with subsequent generations of musicians. Jagger was born into a middle-class family in Dartford, Kent, on 26 July 1943. His father, Basil Fanshawe "Joe" Jagger, was a gymnast and physical education teacher who helped popularise basketball in Britain. His paternal grandfather, David Ernest Jagger, was also a teacher. His mother, Eva Ensley Mary (née Scutts), born in Sydney of English descent, was a hairdresser who was politically active in the Conservative Party in the United Kingdom. His parents were married in 1940 at Holy Trinity Church in Dartford. Jagger's younger brother, Chris (born 19 December 1947), is also a musician, and the two have performed together. Although he was encouraged to follow his father's career path growing up, Jagger has said, "I always sang as a child. I was one of those kids who just liked to sing. Some kids sing in choirs; others like to show off in front of the mirror. I was in the church choir and I also loved listening to singers on the radio—the BBC or Radio Luxembourg—or watching them on TV and in the movies." In September 1950, Keith Richards and Jagger first met as classmates at Wentworth Primary School in Dartford, prior to the Jagger family's 1954 move to Wilmington, Kent. The same year he passed the eleven-plus examination and attended Dartford Grammar School, which now has the Mick Jagger Centre performing arts venue. Jagger and Richards lost contact with each other when they went to different schools. In the mid-1950s, Jagger began his music career, forming a garage band with his friend Dick Taylor. They played songs by Muddy Waters, Chuck Berry, Little Richard, Howlin' Wolf, and Bo Diddley. Jagger met Richards again on 17 October 1961 on Platform Two of Dartford railway station. The Chuck Berry and Muddy Waters records Jagger was carrying revealed a shared interest in rhythm and blues. A musical partnership began shortly afterwards. Richards and Taylor often met Jagger at his house. In late 1961, the meetings moved to Taylor's house, where Alan Etherington and Bob Beckwith joined the trio. The quintet called themselves the Blues Boys. Jagger left school in 1961 after passing seven O-levels and two A-levels. He and Richards moved into a flat at Edith Grove in Chelsea, London, with guitarist Brian Jones. While Richards and Jones planned to start their own rhythm and blues group, Jagger continued to study finance and accounting on a government grant as an undergraduate student at the London School of Economics. He had seriously considered becoming either a journalist or a politician, comparing the latter to a pop star. Brian Jones, using the name Elmo Lewis, began working at the Ealing Club, where a loose music ensemble known as Blues Incorporated was performing, under the leadership of Alexis Korner. Jones, Richards, and Jagger began playing with the group, with Jagger eventually becoming the band's lead singer. Jones, Richards, and Jagger began meeting on their own to practise, establishing the foundation for what would become the Rolling Stones. At the beginning of the Rolling Stones' founding in the early 1960s, the band mostly played for no money at a basement club opposite London's Ealing Broadway tube station, which was subsequently named Ferry's Club. The group had very little equipment and borrowed Korner's gear to play. Their first appearance, under the name the Rollin' Stones, after one of their favourite Muddy Waters songs, was performed at the Marquee Club, a London jazz club, on 12 July 1962. They later changed their name to the Rolling Stones, since it seemed more formal. The initial band members included Jagger, Richards, Jones, Ian Stewart on piano, Dick Taylor on bass, and Tony Chapman on drums, but Richards wrote in Life, his memoir, that, "The drummer that night was Mick Avory—not Tony Chapman, as history has mysteriously handed it down..." In June 1963, the band began a five-month residency at Eel Pie Island Hotel, which the BBC later credited with shaping the band's career. That autumn, Jagger left the London School of Economics to pursue a musical career with the Rolling Stones. The group initially played songs by American rhythm and blues artists, including Chuck Berry and Bo Diddley. The band's first two UK No. 1 hits were cover versions, "It's All Over Now" by Bobby Womack and "Little Red Rooster" by Willie Dixon. Encouraged by manager Andrew Loog Oldham, Jagger and Richards soon began writing their own songs. Their songwriting partnership took time to develop; one of their early compositions was "As Tears Go By", a song written for Marianne Faithfull, a young singer Loog Oldham was promoting. For the Rolling Stones, the duo wrote "The Last Time", the group's third No. 1 single in the UK, based on "This May Be the Last Time", a traditional Negro spiritual song recorded by the Staple Singers in 1955. Jagger and Richards also wrote their first international hit, "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction". It established the Rolling Stones' image as defiant troublemakers in contrast to the Beatles as "lovable moptop[s]". Jagger told Stephen Schiff in a 1992 Vanity Fair profile: I wasn't trying to be rebellious in those days; I was just being me. I wasn't trying to push the edge of anything. I'm being me and ordinary, the guy from suburbia who sings in this band, but someone older might have thought it was just the most awful racket, the most terrible thing, and where are we going if this is music?... But all those songs we sang were pretty tame, really. People didn't think they were, but I thought they were tame. The group's first albums, including Out of Our Heads, Aftermath, and Between the Buttons, were largely unsuccessful commercially. In 1967, Jagger, Richards, and Jones were hounded by authorities over their recreational drug use after the News of the World published a three-part feature, "Pop Stars and Drugs: Facts That Will Shock You". The feature described alleged LSD parties hosted by the Moody Blues and attended by the Who's Pete Townshend and Cream's Ginger Baker, and alleged admissions of drug use by leading pop musicians. The first article targeted Donovan, who was raided and charged soon after the feature aired. The second instalment, published on 5 February, targeted the Rolling Stones. A reporter who contributed to the story spent an evening at the London club Blaise's, where a member of the Rolling Stones allegedly took several Benzedrine tablets, displayed a piece of hashish, and invited his companions back to his flat for a "smoke". The article claimed this was Mick Jagger, but it turned out to be a case of mistaken identity; the reporter had been eavesdropping on Brian Jones. Two days after the article was published, Jagger filed a writ for libel against the News of the World. Jagger and Richards were later arrested on drug charges and given unusually harsh sentences. Jagger was sentenced to three months' imprisonment for possession of four over-the-counter pep pills he had purchased in Italy, and Richards was sentenced to one year in prison for allowing cannabis to be smoked on his property. The traditionally conservative editor of The Times, William Rees-Mogg, wrote an article critical of the sentences. On appeal, Richards' sentence was overturned and Jagger's was amended to a conditional discharge, although he spent one night in London's Brixton Prison. The Rolling Stones continued to face legal battles for the next decade. By the release of the Stones' album Beggars Banquet, Brian Jones was contributing only sporadically to the band. Jagger said Jones was "not psychologically suited to this way of life". His drug use became a hindrance, and he could not obtain a US visa. Richards reported that in a June meeting with Jagger, Richards, and Watts were at Jones' house, and Jones admitted he was unable to "go on the road again". Jones left the band, saying, "I've left, and if I want to I can come back". On 3 July 1969, less than a month later, Jones drowned in the swimming pool at his home, Cotchford Farm, in Hartfield, East Sussex. When asked if he felt guilty about Jones's death, Jagger told Rolling Stone in 1995: No, I don't really. I do feel that I behaved in a very childish way, but we were very young, and in some ways we picked on him. But, unfortunately, he made himself a target for it; he was very, very jealous, very difficult, very manipulative, and if you do that in this kind of a group of people you get back as good as you give, to be honest. I wasn't understanding enough about his drug addiction. No one seemed to know much about drug addiction. Things like LSD were all new. No one knew the harm. People thought cocaine was good for you. On 5 July 1969, two days after Jones' death, the Rolling Stones played a previously scheduled concert at Hyde Park, attended by 250,000 people, dedicating it as a tribute to Jones. It was their first concert with new guitarist, Mick Taylor, who replaced Jones. At the beginning of the Hyde Park concert, Jagger read an excerpt from Percy Bysshe Shelley's poem "Adonaïs", an elegy written on the death of John Keats, after which thousands of butterflies were released in Jones' memory. The band began the concert with "I'm Yours and I'm Hers", a song by Johnny Winter. During the concert, they band played three new songs from two forthcoming albums, "Midnight Rambler" and "Love in Vain", from Let It Bleed, released in December 1969, and "Loving Cup", which appeared on Exile on Main St., released May 1972. They also played "Honky Tonk Women", released as a single the previous day. On 6 December 1969, the Stones performed at the Altamont Free Concert music festival, in which Meredith Hunter was stabbed to death by a member of the Hells Angels Motorcycle Club after drawing a revolver and approaching the stage, which was seen as a threat to the band. Accounts of Hunter's reasoning for drawing the revolver were mixed. According to The Guardian music editor Hunter's death and the overall mood of festival goers "has become symbolic for the corruption of 1960s hippy idealism." Jagger later recalled to Robert Greenfield that he was "scared shitless" that, according to Rolling Stone, "he might be attacked on stage" by Hells Angels members who "felt they had been unfairly blamed for the disaster that left a Stones fan dead." In 1970, Jagger bought Stargroves, a manor house and estate near East Woodhay in Hampshire. The Rolling Stones and several other bands recorded there using the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio. In 1970, Nicolas Roeg's film Performance, produced in 1968 and featuring Jagger, was released. In the film, Jagger plays the role of Turner, a reclusive rock star. Keith Richards' girlfriend Anita Pallenberg also appeared in the film. During a 1970 concert in Paris, Jagger called for the release of imprisoned French Maoists. Jagger and the rest of the Rolling Stones moved to Southern France as tax exiles in 1971 to avoid paying a 93 per cent supertax imposed by Harold Wilson's Labour government on the country's top earners. After the band's acrimonious split with their second manager, Allen Klein, in 1971, and Richards' heroin addiction, Jagger assumed control of the band's business affairs, leading to feuds between Jagger and Richards. Jagger has managed the group ever since, with Prince Rupert Loewenstein acting as business adviser and financial manager from 1968 until 2007. Jagger and the rest of the band changed their look and style as the 1970s progressed. While in France, Jagger learned to play guitar and contributed guitar parts for songs on Sticky Fingers (1971) and the Stones' subsequent albums except Dirty Work in 1986. For the Rolling Stones' highly publicised 1972 American tour, Jagger wore glam-rock clothing and glitter makeup on stage. Their interest in the blues had been made manifest on the 1972 album Exile on Main St. Music critic Russell Hall described Jagger's emotional singing on the gospel-influenced "Let It Loose", which appears on Exile on Main St., as the singer's best vocal achievement. In 1972, Jagger, Charlie Watts, Bill Wyman, Nicky Hopkins, and Ry Cooder released Jamming with Edward!, an album recorded during the band's Let It Bleed sessions. The album includes loose jams recorded while the rest of the Stones (reportedly) were waiting for Keith Richards to return to the studio. In November 1972, the band began recording sessions in Kingston, Jamaica, for the album Goats Head Soup, which was released in 1973 and reached No. 1 in both the UK and US. The album includes the song "Angie", a global hit that was the first in a string of commercially successful singles to emerge from tepidly received studio albums. The sessions for Goats Head Soup produced unused material, including "Waiting on a Friend", a ballad that was not released until the Tattoo You LP nine years later. Another legal battle over drugs, dating back to their stay in France, interrupted the making of Goats Head Soup. Authorities issued a warrant for Richards' arrest, and the other band members returned briefly to France for questioning related to the incident. Along with Jagger's 1967 and 1970 convictions on drug charges, this complicated the band's plans for their Pacific tour in early 1973. The band was denied permission to play in Japan and was nearly banned from playing in Australia. A European tour followed in September and October 1973, which bypassed France after Richards' arrest in England on drug charges. The 1974 album It's Only Rock 'n Roll was recorded in the Musicland Studios in Munich; it reached No. 2 in the UK and No. 1 in the US. Jagger and Richards produced the album credited as "the Glimmer Twins". The album and the single of the same name were both hits. Following Mick Taylor's exodus from the band in December 1974, the Stones needed a new guitarist. The recording sessions for the next album, Black and Blue (1976) (No. 2 in the UK, No. 1 in the US), in Munich provided an opportunity for some guitarists hoping to join the band to work while trying out. Several guitarists were auditioned, some without even knowing they were auditioning. Ronnie Wood, then the guitarist of the band Faces was selected and joined the band in 1975. Wood has sometimes functioned as a mediator in the group, especially between Jagger and Richards. His first full-length LP with the band was Some Girls (1978), on which they ventured into disco and punk, a move primarily led by Jagger. Following the success of Some Girls, the band released the album Emotional Rescue in mid-1980. During recording sessions for the album, a rift between Jagger and Richards began developing. Richards wanted to tour in the summer or autumn of 1980 to promote Emotional Rescue, but Jagger declined. Emotional Rescue hit the top of the charts on both sides of the Atlantic and the title track reached No. 3 in the US. In early 1981, the Rolling Stones reconvened and began touring the US that year, leaving little time to write and record a new album. The band's album Tattoo You, released in 1981, featured several outtakes, including "Start Me Up", the album's lead single that reached No. 2 in the US and ranked No. 22 on Billboard's Hot 100 year-end chart. Two songs, "Waiting on a Friend" (US No. 13), and "Tops", feature Mick Taylor's unused rhythm guitar tracks. Jazz saxophonist Sonny Rollins plays on three Tattoo You songs, "Slave", "Neighbours", and "Waiting on a Friend". The album reached No. 2 in the UK and No. 1 in the US. While continuing to tour and release albums with the Rolling Stones, Jagger began a solo career. According to a February 1985 article in Rolling Stone, Jagger did so to "establish an artistic identity for himself apart from the Rolling Stones" which was described as "his boldest attempt yet". Jagger started writing and recording material for his first solo album She's the Boss. Released on 19 February 1985, the album, produced by Nile Rodgers and Bill Laswell, features Herbie Hancock, Jeff Beck, Jan Hammer, Pete Townshend and the Compass Point All Stars. It sold well, and the single "Just Another Night" was a Top Ten hit. During this period, he collaborated with the Jacksons on the song "State of Shock", sharing lead vocals with Michael Jackson. In 1985, Jagger performed without the Rolling Stones at Live Aid, a multi-venue charity concert in 1985. Jagger performed at Philadelphia's JFK Stadium, where he also performed a duet of "It's Only Rock and Roll" with Tina Turner, highlighted by Jagger tearing away Turner's skirt, and a cover of "Dancing in the Street" with David Bowie, who was performing at Wembley Stadium in London. The video was shown simultaneously on the screens of both Wembley and JFK Stadiums. The song reached No. 1 in the UK the same year. Richards ended his heroin use and became more present in decision-making, but Jagger was not accustomed to Richards' presence and did not like his authority over the band diminished. This led to a feud between Jagger and Richards that has been referred to as "World War III" with concern at the time that Jagger touring without the Stones could prove a "death sentence" for the band. When the Stones released Dirty Work in March 1986, Jagger's relations with Richards had reached an all-time low, leading Jagger to refuse to tour with the band to support the new album. Jagger responded, saying: I think that one ought to be allowed to have one's artistic side apart from just being in the Rolling Stones. I love the Rolling Stones—I think it's wonderful, I think it's done a lot of wonderful things for music. But, you know, it cannot be, at my age and after spending all these years, the only thing in my life. Jagger released his second solo album, Primitive Cool, in 1987. Though it failed to match the commercial success of his debut solo album, it was critically well received. Richards released his first solo album, Talk is Cheap, shortly afterwards. Many felt the respective solo efforts marked the end of the Rolling Stones as a band. In 1988, Jagger produced the songs "Glamour Boys" and "Which Way to America" on Living Colour's album Vivid. Between 15 and 28 March, he also performed a solo concert tour in Japan, playing in Tokyo, Nagoya, and Osaka. Jagger and Richards reunited in the Barbados in 1988 and produced dozens of new songs. Richards recalls: We just started in. And within two days, we realized we had five or six songs happening. I did have to take Mick to a few discos—which are not my favourite places in the world—because Mick likes to go out and dance at night. So I did that. That was my sacrifice. I humoured him. And that's when I knew we could work together. Ron Wood believes the modest sales of Jagger's Primitive Cool "surprised" Jagger and made him "realize the strength of the band". Richards recalled, "We've been stuffed together for years and one of the consequences of the break was making us realize we were stuck together whether we liked it or not. Jagger said, "Because we've been doing it for so long, we don't really have to discuss it. When we come up with a lick or a riff or a chorus, we already know if it's right or if it's wrong." On 29 August 1989, the band released its 19th UK and 21st US album, Steel Wheels. The 1989–1990 Steel Wheels/Urban Jungle Tour was the band's first world tour in seven years and their biggest stage production to date. Opening acts included Living Colour and Guns N' Roses. Recordings from the tour were released in a 1991 concert album, Flashpoint, which reached No. 6 in the UK and No. 16 in the US, and the concert film Live at the Max, released in 1991. The tour was Bill Wyman's last. After years of deliberation, Wyman chose to leave the band, although his departure was not made official until January 1993. Following the success of Steel Wheels, and the end of Jagger and Richards' well-publicised feud, Jagger attempted to reestablish himself as a solo artist. He acquired Rick Rubin as co-producer in January 1992 for his third solo album, Wandering Spirit. Sessions for the album began that month in Los Angeles and ended nine months later, in September 1992. Richards recorded his second solo studio album, Main Offender, at the same time. On Wandering Spirit, Jagger used Lenny Kravitz as a vocalist on his cover of Bill Withers' "Use Me" and bassist Flea from Red Hot Chili Peppers on three separate tracks. Jagger signed with Atlantic Records, which had signed the Stones in the 1970s, to distribute the solo album. Wandering Spirit, released in February 1993, and The Very Best of Mick Jagger, a compilation album containing no new material, were both released by Atlantic Records. Wandering Spirit was commercially successful, reaching No. 12 in the UK and No. 11 in the US. In 1993, the Stones were ready to start recording their next studio album, and Charlie Watts recruited bassist Darryl Jones, a former sideman of Miles Davis and Sting, as Wyman's replacement for the recording of Voodoo Lounge, released in 1994. Jones continued to perform with the band as the band's touring and session bassist. The album was well received critically and proved commercially successful, going double platinum in the US. Reviews of the Voodoo Lounge noted and credited the album's "traditionalist" sounds to the Rolling Stones' new producer Don Was. Voodoo Lounge won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album at the 1995 Grammy Awards. It reached No. 1 in the UK and No. 2 in the US. The Voodoo Lounge Tour to support Voodoo Lounge lasted into 1996, grossing $320 million and becoming the world's highest-grossing tour ever at the time. On 8 September 1994, the Stones performed "Love Is Strong", a new song, and "Start Me Up" at the 1994 MTV Video Music Awards at Radio City Music Hall in New York City. The band was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award at the 1994 MTV ceremony. The Rolling Stones ended the 1990s with the album Bridges to Babylon, released in 1997 to mixed reviews. It reached No. 6 in the UK and No. 3 in the US. The music video for the single "Anybody Seen My Baby?" featuring Angelina Jolie was played in steady rotation on both MTV and VH1. Sales were roughly equal to those of previous records (about 1.2 million copies sold in the US). The subsequent Bridges to Babylon Tour, which crossed Europe, North America, and other destinations, proved the band remained a strong live music attraction. Another live album, No Security, was released from the tour. No Security included all new songs, except "Live With Me" and "The Last Time", which had been previously unreleased on live albums. The album reached No. 67 in the UK and No. 34 in the US. In 1999, the Rolling Stones staged the No Security Tour in the US and continued the Bridges to Babylon tour in Europe. In 2001, Jagger released his fourth solo album, Goddess in the Doorway, spawning the single "Visions of Paradise", which reached No. 44 in the UK. Following the 11 September attacks, Jagger joined Richards in the Concert for New York City, a benefit concert in response to the terrorist attack, to sing "Salt of the Earth" and "Miss You". From 1989 to 2001, according to Fortune, the Stones generated more than US$1.5 billion in total gross revenue, surpassing the revenue of U2, Bruce Springsteen, and Michael Jackson. Jagger celebrated the Rolling Stones' 40th anniversary by touring with the band on the year-long Licks Tour, supporting the band's commercially successful career retrospective, Forty Licks, a double album. Along with Eurythmics member and record producer David A. Stewart, Jagger wrote and performed the soundtrack to the 2004 romantic comedy Alfie, which included the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song-winning single "Old Habits Die Hard". In 2007, the band grossed US$437 million on A Bigger Bang Tour, earning the band an entry in the 2007 edition of Guinness World Records for the most lucrative music tour ever. Asked if the band would retire after the tour, Jagger said, "I'm sure the Rolling Stones will do more things and more records and more tours. We've got no plans to stop any of that really." Two years later, in October 2009, Jagger joined U2 to perform "Gimme Shelter" with Fergie and will.i.am, and "Stuck in a Moment You Can't Get Out Of" with U2 at the 25th Anniversary Rock & Roll Hall of Fame Concert. On 20 May 2011, Jagger announced the formation of a new supergroup, SuperHeavy, including Dave Stewart, Joss Stone, Damian Marley, and A.R. Rahman. The group started with a phone call Jagger received from Stewart. Stewart had heard three sound systems playing different music at the same time in his home in St Ann's Bay, Jamaica. This gave him the idea of creating a group with Jagger, fusing the musical styles of several artists. After multiple phone calls and deliberation, the other members of the group were decided upon. SuperHeavy released one album and two singles in 2011, reportedly recording 29 songs in ten days. Jagger is featured on will.i.am's 2011 single "T.H.E. (The Hardest Ever)" along with Jennifer Lopez, officially released to iTunes on 4 February 2012. On 21 February 2012, Jagger, B.B. King, Buddy Guy and Jeff Beck, and a blues ensemble, performed at the White House concert series before President Barack Obama. When Jagger held out a mic to him, Obama twice sang the line "Come on, baby don't you want to go" of the blues cover "Sweet Home Chicago", the blues anthem of Obama's hometown. Jagger hosted the season finale of Saturday Night Live on 19 and 20 May 2012, doing several comic skits and playing some Rolling Stones' hits with Arcade Fire, Foo Fighters and Jeff Beck. Jagger performed in 12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief with the Rolling Stones on 12 December 2012. The Stones played the Glastonbury festival in 2013, headlining on Saturday, 29 June. This was followed by two concerts in London's Hyde Park as part of their 50th anniversary celebrations, their first there since their famous 1969 performance. In 2013, Jagger teamed up with his brother Chris Jagger for two new duets on his album Concertina Jack, released to mark the 40th anniversary of his debut album. On 7 October 2016, the Stones headlined the first night of the three-day music festival Desert Trip and covered the Beatles' 1969 single "Come Together"; Paul McCartney performed the next night. In July 2017, Jagger released the double A-sided single "Gotta Get a Grip" / "England Lost". They were released as a response to the "anxiety, unknowability of the changing political situation" in a post-Brexit UK, according to Jagger. Accompanying music videos were released for both songs. In March 2019, a Rolling Stones tour of the US and Canada from April to June had to be postponed as Jagger needed a transcatheter aortic valve replacement. On 4 April 2019, it was announced that Jagger had successfully undergone the procedure at NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital, and was in great health. After a six-week delay while Jagger recovered, the No Filter Tour resumed with two performances at Chicago's Soldier Field. The band's 1973 album Goats Head Soup was reissued on in September 2020 and featured previously unreleased outtakes, such as "Scarlet", featuring Jimmy Page. The album topped the UK Albums Chart as the Rolling Stones became the first band to top the chart across six different decades. The Rolling Stones—featuring Jagger, Richards, Watts and Wood at their homes—were one of the headline acts on Global Citizen's One World: Together at Home on-line and on-screen concert on 18 April 2020, a global event featuring dozens of artists and comedians to support frontline healthcare workers and the World Health Organization during the COVID-19 pandemic. Five days later, they released "Living in a Ghost Town", a new Rolling Stones' single recorded in London and Los Angeles in 2019 and finished in isolation (part of the new material that the band were recording in the studio before the COVID-19 lockdown), a song that the band "thought would resonate through the times we're living in" and their first release of original material since 2012. The song reached No. 1 on the German Singles Chart, the first time the Stones had reached the top spot in 52 years, and making them the oldest artists ever to do so. In August 2021, it was announced that Charlie Watts would undergo an unspecified medical procedure and would not perform on the remainder of the No Filter tour; the longtime Stones associate Steve Jordan filled in as drummer. Watts died unexpectedly at a London hospital on 24 August 2021, at the age of 80, with his family around him. Jagger, Richards and Wood paid tribute to him, along with former bandmate Wyman. It was discussed whether the band would continue, and they opted to carry on as it was what "Charlie wanted us to do". During their first show after Watts' death, Jagger told the crowd: It's a bit of a poignant night for us. Because this is our first tour in 59 years that we've done without our lovely Charlie Watts. We all miss Charlie so much. We miss him as a band. We miss him as friends, on and off the stage. We've got so many memories of Charlie. I'm sure some of you that have seen us before have got memories of Charlie as well. And I hope you'll remember him like we do. So we'd like to dedicate this show to Charlie. In a May 2022 interview, Jagger stated "I don't really expect him to be there any more if I turn round during a show. But I do think about him. Not only during rehearsals or on stage, but in other ways too." On the one year anniversary of Watts' death, Jagger shared what Rolling Stone described as a "moving tribute" on social media, which included a voiceover by Jagger backed with "Till the Next Goodbye". That same year, Jagger co-wrote and performed "Strange Game" for the television series Slow Horses after being emailed "out of the blue" by composer Daniel Pemberton, whom he did not know; it was subsequently nominated for an Emmy award. That June, two shows scheduled in the Stones' Sixty tour were postponed after Jagger contracted COVID-19. The tour resumed following Jagger's recovery in late June. Jagger launched his own line of harmonicas the following January in collaboration with whynow Music and Lee Oskar, expressing a desire to encourage younger musicians to take up the instrument. Jagger's songwriting partnership with Richards is one of the most successful in history. His relationship with Richards is frequently described as "love/hate" by the media. Richards said in a 1998 interview: "I think of our differences as a family squabble. If I shout and scream at him, it's because no one else has the guts to do it or else they're paid not to do it. At the same time I'd hope Mick realises that I'm a friend who is just trying to bring him into line and do what needs to be done." Dirty Work (a UK and US No. 4) was released in March 1986 to mixed reviews, despite the US top-five hit "Harlem Shuffle". With relations between Richards and Jagger at a low, Jagger refused to tour to promote the album, and instead undertook his own solo tour, which included Rolling Stones' songs. Richards has referred to this period in his relations with Jagger as "World War III". As a result of the animosity within the band at this time, they almost broke up. Jagger's solo albums, She's the Boss (UK No. 6; US No. 13) (1985) and Primitive Cool (UK No. 26; US No. 41) (1987), met with moderate success and, in 1988, with the Rolling Stones mostly inactive, Richards released his first solo album, Talk Is Cheap (UK No. 37; US No. 24). It was well received by fans and critics, going gold in the US. The following year 25×5: the Continuing Adventures of the Rolling Stones, a documentary spanning the career of the band, was released for their 25th anniversary. Richards' autobiography, Life, was published on 26 October 2010. According to a 15 October 2010 article, Richards described Jagger as "unbearable", noting that their relationship had been strained "for decades". By 2015, Richards' opinion had softened. While saying Jagger could come off as a "snob", he added "I still love him dearly ... your friends don't have to be perfect." Jagger has had an intermittent acting career. His most significant role was in Donald Cammell and Nicolas Roeg's Performance (1968), and as Australian bushranger Ned Kelly in the film of the same name (1970). He composed an improvised soundtrack for Kenneth Anger's film Invocation of My Demon Brother on the Moog synthesiser in 1969. Jagger auditioned for the role of Dr. Frank N. Furter in the 1975 film adaptation of The Rocky Horror Show, a role that was eventually played by Tim Curry, the original performer from its theatrical run in London's West End. Director Alejandro Jodorowsky approached him in the same year to play the role of Feyd-Rautha in his proposed adaptation of Frank Herbert's Dune, but the movie never made it to the screen. Jagger appeared as himself in the Rutles' film All You Need Is Cash (1978) and was cast as Wilbur, a main character in Werner Herzog's Fitzcarraldo, in the late 1970s. The illness of principal actor Jason Robards (later replaced by Klaus Kinski), and a delay in the film's notoriously difficult production, resulted in him being unable to continue because of schedule conflicts with a Stones' tour; some footage of Jagger's work is shown in the documentaries Burden of Dreams and My Best Fiend. Jagger developed a reputation for playing the heavy later in his acting career in films including Freejack (1992), Bent (1997), and The Man From Elysian Fields (2002). In 1991, Jagger founded Jagged Films with Victoria Pearman and, in 1995, founded the film production company Lip Service with Steve Tisch. Jagged Films' first release was the World War II drama Enigma (2001), starring Kate Winslet as one of Bletchley Park's Enigma codebreakers. That same year, Jagged Films produced a documentary about Jagger entitled Being Mick. The programme, which first aired in the US on ABC on 22 November, coincided with the release of his fourth solo album, Goddess in the Doorway. In 2008 the company began work on The Women, an adaptation of the George Cukor's film of the same name, directed by Diane English. As a member of the Rolling Stones Jagger appears in several documentaries, including Gimme Shelter, filmed during the band's 1969 tour of the US, and Sympathy for the Devil (1968) directed by French New Wave director Jean-Luc Godard. Martin Scorsese worked with Jagger on Shine a Light, a documentary film featuring the band with footage from the A Bigger Bang Tour during two nights of performances at New York's Beacon Theatre. It screened in Berlin in February 2008. McCarthy predicted the film would fare better once released to video than in its limited theatrical runs. Jagger was a co-producer of, and guest-starred in the first episode of the short-lived American comedy television series The Knights of Prosperity. He also co-produced the James Brown biopic Get On Up (2014). Alongside Martin Scorsese, Rich Cohen and Terence Winter, Jagger co-created and executive produced the period drama series Vinyl (2016), which starred Bobby Cannavale and aired for one season on HBO before its cancellation. Jagger portrays an English art dealer-collector and patron in Giuseppe Capotondi's thriller The Burnt Orange Heresy (2020). Jagger has been married and divorced once, and has had other relationships, resulting in eight children with five women. As of 2021, he also had five grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. Jagger's first serious girlfriend was Cleo Sylvestre, whom he began to date around 1961. Jagger dated Chrissie Shrimpton between 1963 and 1966. From 1966 to 1970, he had a relationship with Marianne Faithfull, the English singer-songwriter/actress with whom he wrote "Sister Morphine", a song on Sticky Fingers. Faithfull was seven or eight months pregnant when she gave birth to a stillborn daughter on 22 November 1968. They had named the girl Corrina. Faithfull has stated that both she and Jagger were devastated at the loss, and that they both coped in different ways, her with drugs and Jagger by burying himself in work. She also stated that she knew that he longed to be a father and that the event marked the beginning of the end of their relationship. Jagger met the American singer Marsha Hunt in 1969 and, though she was married, the pair had a relationship. When it ended in June 1970, Hunt was pregnant with Jagger's first child, Karis Hunt Jagger, who was born on 4 November 1970. Hunt is the inspiration for the song "Brown Sugar", also from Sticky Fingers. In 1970, he met Nicaraguan-born Bianca Pérez-Mora Macias. They married on 12 May 1971 in a Catholic ceremony in Saint-Tropez, France. Their daughter, Jade Sheena Jezebel Jagger, was born on 21 October 1971. They separated in 1977, and in May 1978 she filed for divorce on the grounds of his adultery. During his marriage to Pérez-Mora Macias, Jagger had an affair with then-Playboy model Bebe Buell from 1974 to 1976 and believed for some time that he was the father of her daughter Liv. Upon her birth Jagger called Buell and stated he wanted to meet his child. He and bandmate Ronnie Wood were the first to visit the two in the hospital. Jagger introduced Buell to friends as the mother of one of his children for years. The actual father was later established to be Steven Tyler. In late 1977, Jagger began dating American model Jerry Hall. They had an unofficial private marriage ceremony in Bali, Indonesia, on 21 November 1990, and lived at Downe House in Richmond, London. The couple had four children: Elizabeth 'Lizzie' Scarlett Jagger (born 2 March 1984), James Leroy Augustin Jagger (born in 1985), Georgia May Ayeesha Jagger (born 12 January 1992), and Gabriel Luke Beauregard Jagger (born in 1997). During his relationship with Hall, Jagger had an affair from 1991 to 1994 with Italian singer/model Carla Bruni, who later became the First Lady of France when she married then-President of France Nicolas Sarkozy in 2008. Jagger's relationship with Hall ended after she discovered that he had had an affair with Brazilian model Luciana Gimenez, who gave birth to Jagger's seventh child, Lucas Maurice Morad Jagger, in May 1999. Jagger's unofficial marriage to Hall was declared invalid, unlawful, and null and void by the High Court of England and Wales in London in 1999. From 2000 to 2001 Jagger was in a relationship with the English model Sophie Dahl. Jagger was in a relationship with fashion designer L'Wren Scott from 2001 until her death in 2014. The couple reportedly considered having children earlier in their relationship, but eventually did not. Scott died by suicide in March 2014. She left her entire estate, estimated at US$9 million, to him. Jagger set up the L'Wren Scott scholarship at London's Central Saint Martins College. Since Scott died in 2014, Jagger has been in a relationship with American ballet dancer Melanie Hamrick. Jagger was 73 when Hamrick gave birth to their son Deveraux Octavian Basil Jagger in 2016. Jagger's father, Basil "Joe" Jagger, died of pneumonia on 11 November 2006 at age 93. Although the Rolling Stones were on the A Bigger Bang tour, Jagger flew to Britain to see his father before returning the same day to Las Vegas, where he was to perform that night, after being informed his father's condition was improving. The show went ahead as scheduled, despite Jagger learning of his father's death that afternoon. Jagger's friends said that the show going on was "what Joe would have wanted". Jagger called his father the "greatest influence" in his life. Jagger is a supporter of music in schools, a patron of The Mick Jagger Centre in Dartford, and sponsors music through his Red Rooster Programme in its local schools. The Red Rooster name is taken from the title of one of the Rolling Stones' earliest singles. An avid cricket fan, Jagger founded Jagged Internetworks to cover the sport. He keenly follows the England national football team, and has regularly attended FIFA World Cup games. In 2021, Fox Business quoted an estimate that his net worth was US$500 million and called him "one of music's more identifiable figures". Earlier that same year, The Times had quoted it at approximately £310 million. Jagger was honoured with a knighthood for services to popular music in the Queen's 2002 Birthday Honours, and on 12 December 2003 he received the accolade from The Prince of Wales. Jagger's father and daughters Karis and Elizabeth were present. Jagger stated that although the award did not have significant meaning for him, he was "touched" by the significance that it held for his father, saying that his father "was very proud". In 1989, Jagger was inducted into the American Rock and Roll Hall of Fame alongside the other Stones, including Mick Taylor and Ronnie Wood as well as Brian Jones and Ian Stewart (posthumously). In November 2004, the Rolling Stones were among the inaugural inductees into the UK Music Hall of Fame. In 2014, the Jaggermeryx naida ("Jagger's water nymph"), a 19-million-year-old species of 'long-legged pig', was named after Jagger. Jaw fragments of the long-extinct anthracotheres were discovered in Egypt. The trilobite species Aegrotocatellus jaggeri was also named after Jagger. On Jagger's 75th birthday, scientists named seven fossil stoneflies after present and former members of the band. Two species, Petroperla mickjaggeri and Lapisperla keithrichardsi, were placed within a new family Petroperlidae. The new family was named in honour of the Rolling Stones, derived from the Greek "petra" that stands for "stone". The scientists referred to the fossils as "Rolling Stoneflies". In 2023, Jagger and bandmate Keith Richards were honoured in Dartford with statues. From the time that the Rolling Stones developed their anti-establishment image in the mid-1960s, Jagger, with Richards, has been an enduring icon of the counterculture. This was enhanced by his drug-related arrests, sexually charged on-stage antics, provocative song lyrics, and his role in Performance. One of his biographers, Christopher Andersen, describes him as "one of the dominant cultural figures of our time," adding that Jagger was "the story of a generation". Jagger, who at the time described himself as an anarchist and espoused the leftist slogans of the era, took part in a demonstration against the Vietnam War outside the US Embassy in London in 1968. This inspired him to write "Street Fighting Man" that same year. In 1967, Cecil Beaton photographed Jagger's naked buttocks, a photo that sold at Sotheby's auction house in 1986 for $4,000. Jagger was reported to be a contender for the anonymous subject of Carly Simon's 1972 hit song "You're So Vain", on which he sings backing vocals. Pop artist Andy Warhol painted a series of silkscreen portraits of Jagger in 1975, one of which was owned by Farah Diba, wife of the Shah of Iran. It hung on a wall inside the royal palace in Tehran. In 2010, a retrospective exhibition of portraits of Jagger was presented at the festival Rencontres d'Arles, in France. The catalogue of the exhibition is the first photo album of Jagger and shows his evolution over 50 years. Jagger's relationships served as the inspiration for the theatrical show parody "Jumpin' Jack", written by Lyle Victor Albert. In the show, the protagonist, Jack, is "a member of that ever-expanding, worldwide club made up of Mick Jagger's illegitimate children." Maroon 5's song "Moves like Jagger" is about Jagger, who acknowledged the song in an interview, calling the concept "very flattering". Kesha's song "Tik Tok" and the Black Eyed Peas' hit "The Time (Dirty Bit)" refer to Jagger, and his vocal delivery is mentioned by rapper Ghostface Killah in his song "The Champ", from his 2006 album Fishscale, which was later referenced by Kanye West in the 2008 T.I. and Jay-Z single "Swagga Like Us". On television, the ITV satirical puppet show Spitting Image caricatured Jagger as perpetually high throughout its run in the 1980s and 1990s. In 1998, the MTV animated show Celebrity Deathmatch had a clay-animated fight to the death between Jagger and Aerosmith lead singer Steven Tyler; Jagger wins the fight by using his tongue to stab Tyler through the chest. The 2000 film Almost Famous, set in 1973, refers to Jagger: "Because if you think Mick Jagger'll still be out there, trying to be a rock star at age 50 ... you're sadly, sadly mistaken." This was a view that Jagger similarly shared in 1975, once quipping to People magazine "I'd rather be dead than sing 'Satisfaction' when I'm 45". In 2012, Jagger was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork—the Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band album cover—to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admires. In more recent decades, Jagger has been seen as a "poster boy" for healthy living and, as of 2006, was "said to run 12 km a day, to kick-box, lift weights, cycle, and practise ballet and yoga"; he has his own personal trainer. It has been estimated that during the average show, he covers between five and twelve miles on stage "while strutting and shimmying through shows at dizzying speeds". In the words of British dramatist and novelist Philip Norman, "the only point concerning Mick Jagger's influence over 'young people' that doctors and psychologists agreed on was that it wasn't, under any circumstances, fundamentally harmless". According to Norman, even Elvis Presley at his most scandalous had not exerted a "power so wholly and disturbingly physical". "[W]hile [Presley] made girls scream, [he] did not have Jagger's ability to make men feel uncomfortable." Norman likens Jagger in his early performances with the Rolling Stones in the 1960s to a male ballet dancer, with "his conflicting and colliding sexuality: the swan's neck and smeared harlot eyes allied to an overstuffed and straining codpiece". His performance style has been studied by academics who analysed gender, image and sexuality. Musicologist Sheila Whiteley noted that Jagger's performance style "opened up definitions of gendered masculinity and so laid the foundations for self-invention and sexual plasticity which are now an integral part of contemporary youth culture". His stage personas also contributed significantly to the British tradition of popular music that always featured the character song and where the art of singing becomes a matter of acting—which creates a question about the singer's relationship to his own words. His voice has been described as a powerful expressive tool for communicating feelings to his audience, and expressing an alternative vision of society. To express "virility and unrestrained passion" he developed techniques previously used by African American preachers and gospel singers such as "the roar, the guttural belt style of singing, and the buzz, a more nasal and raspy sound". Steven Van Zandt wrote: "The acceptance of Jagger's voice on pop radio was a turning point in rock & roll. He broke open the door for everyone else. Suddenly, Eric Burdon and Van Morrison weren't so weird—even Bob Dylan." Over time, Jagger has developed into the template for rock front men and, with the help of the Stones, has, in the words of the Telegraph, "changed music" through his contributions to it as a pioneer of the modern music industry. Jagger is often described as one of the most popular and influential front men in the history of rock & roll; in 1994 the New York Times noted that his "influence hangs heavily over contemporary British rock" as many singers "incorporated elements" of his onstage presence into their personas. In 2015, Billboard ranked him among the best rock front men of all time, referring to him as "the rock and roll front man" whose "swagger brought a style and sexiness to rock music that he built on for decades" and openly wondering "would we even have rock stars without Mick?" David Bowie joined many rock bands with blues, folk, and soul orientations in his first attempts as a musician in the mid-1960s, and he was to recall: "I used to dream of being their Mick Jagger." Bowie suggested, "I think Mick Jagger would be astounded and amazed if he realized that to many people he is not a sex symbol, but a mother image." Jagger appeared on Rolling Stone's List of 100 Greatest Singers at No. 16; in the article, Lenny Kravitz wrote: "I sometimes talk to people who sing perfectly in a technical sense who don't understand Mick Jagger. [...] His sense of pitch and melody is really sophisticated. His vocals are stunning, flawless in their own kind of perfection." This edition also cites Jagger as a key influence on Jack White, Steven Tyler and Iggy Pop. Jagger also has been known to seek out newcomer artists to the music industry and advise them. The Telegraph has called Mick Jagger "the Rolling Stone who changed music". CNN has called Jagger's "greatest talent, besides strutting and singing" his "ability to surround himself and the rest of the band with a group of very able executives." Billboard ranked Jagger as the greatest rock lead singer of all time, writing "no one has moves like Jagger -- nor the voice, the image, the fashion sense, or the remarkably enduring charisma...After so many years, Mick Jagger continues to personify not only the Rolling Stones but rock'n'roll itself". As Jagger has aged, his continued vitality has provoked comment. Bon Jovi front man Jon Bon Jovi said: "I can't get over it...I'm...dying already and I'm gonna go out there and play four songs. How do they do it?" Since his early career Jagger has embodied what some authors describe as a "Dionysian archetype" of "eternal youth" personified by many rock stars and the rock culture. Jagger has repeatedly said that he will not write an autobiography, but according to John Blake, after a slew of unauthorised biographies, Jagger was persuaded by Lord Weidenfeld in the early 1980s to prepare his own for a £1 million advance. The resulting 75,000-word manuscript is held by Blake, who briefly planned to publish it until Jagger withdrew support. "Mick Jagger is the least egotistical person," observed Watts in 2008. "He'll do what's right for the band. He's not a big head—and, if he was, he went through it thirty years ago." Jagger was slated to appear in the 1982 film Fitzcarraldo and some scenes were shot with him, but he had to leave for a Rolling Stones' tour and his character was eliminated. Running Out of Luck (1987) Enigma (2001) Being Mick (2001) The Women (2008) Get on Up (2014) Mr. Dynamite: The Rise of James Brown (2014) Vinyl (2016) Led Zeppelin used the mobile studio to record material for the albums Physical Graffiti and Houses of the Holy. Dire Straits, Lou Reed, Bob Marley, Horslips, Fleetwood Mac, Bad Company, Status Quo, Iron Maiden, and Wishbone Ash, all recorded in the mobile studio. The Who recorded "Won't Get Fooled Again" in Stargroves. The Rolling Stones Mobile Studio was used to record the Deep Purple song "Smoke on the Water". The lyrics to the song, which Deep Purple had not intended to release, mention the mobile studio and were intended as a joke about it almost burning to the ground from a nearby fire. To rescue the mobile from the fire started by a flare gun, the Stones' crew had to smash a window and release the parking brake to roll it out of the way. Deep Purple referred to it as the "Rolling truck Stones thing" in the song. The Deep Purple lyrics, "We all came out to Montreux ... to make records with a mobile", reference the incident. The mobile is currently owned by the National Music Centre. Williamson, Nigel. ""Epiphany" Opens Door to Jagger Disc". Billboard. Retrieved 23 August 2023. "Mick Jagger". Front Row. 26 December 2012. BBC Radio 4. Archived from the original on 20 February 2014. Retrieved 18 January 2014. Anon. "Baptism entry for Mick Jagger, rock musician, from the registers of Dartford St. Alban for 6 October 1943". Medway City Ark Document Gallery. Archived from the original on 5 August 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2009. "Mick Jagger defies years as he hits pension age". Reuters. 25 July 2008. Retrieved 16 July 2022. Edwards, Adam (14 November 2006). "RIP Jumping Jack Flash senior". The Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 13 August 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Norman 2012, p. 959: "Joe Jagger, that onetime wiry gymnast, was now a frail eighty-eight-year-old, lost without his partner of almost sixty years." "Jagger's father dies". The Sydney Morning Herald. 13 November 2006. Archived from the original on 28 May 2021. Retrieved 28 May 2021. Basil "Joe" Jagger, a physical education teacher who helped popularise basketball in Britain, died at a hospital in Kingston, Surrey, about a week after he was injured during a fall at his home. Barratt, Nick (24 November 2006). "Family detective: Mick Jagger". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 9 June 2010. Retrieved 28 May 2021. This suggested that some family upheaval had taken place, which was confirmed by an examination of David senior's life. David Jagger, Mick's great-grandfather, was born in Morley, Yorkshire, in 1845. Decurtis, Anthony (6 July 2000). "Eva Jagger, 1913–2000". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 4 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Christopher Sandford, The Rolling Stones: Fifty Years (Simon and Schuster, London, 2021), p. 22. "Chris Jagger biography at". AllMusic. Retrieved 31 December 2009. Wiederhorn, Jon (6 December 2013). "Chris Jagger Keeps on Grooving With a Little Help From Big Brother Mick". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2014. Jagger et al. 2003, p. 13. Nelson 2010, p. 8. "Jagger's family affair at school". BBC News. 30 March 2000. Retrieved 6 November 2019. Wenner, Jann (14 December 1995). "Mick Jagger Remembers". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 19 August 2020. Retrieved 5 November 2020. "Anniversary of Mick Jagger and Keith Richards Dartford meeting". BBC News. 17 October 2011. Archived from the original on 8 May 2018. Retrieved 13 April 2018. "Mick Jagger – The Rolling Stones". The Rolling Stones. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. White 2003, pp. 119–120. Nelson 2010, p. 9. Greenfield 1981. Nelson 2010, pp. 10–11. "Street fighting men from the suburbs". The Independent. 23 June 1990. p. 43. Retrieved 16 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Dunford, Kara (27 August 2015). ""A Life of Adventure" – LSE at 120". London School of Economics. Archived from the original on 16 August 2020. Retrieved 19 August 2020. "The 17 most successful alumni from the London School of Economics". Business Insider. 22 May 2016. Archived from the original on 20 August 2017. Retrieved 8 September 2017. "Mick Jagger Fast Facts". CNN. 25 June 2013. Archived from the original on 7 September 2020. Retrieved 19 August 2020. Tremlett 1974, pp. 109–110. Andersen 2012, p. 49. "The Rolling Stones Biography". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 6 June 2006. Richards & Fox 2010, p. 97. Taylor, Alex (18 June 2018). "The Rolling Stones: How Eel Pie Island shaped the band's career". BBC News. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Speed Read: 11 Juiciest Bits from Philip Norman's Biography of Mick Jagger". The Daily Beast. 1 October 2012. Retrieved 6 March 2018. Roberts 2006, p. 165. "100 Greatest Rolling Stones Songs". Rolling Stone. 15 October 2013. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. Retrieved 18 October 2017. Jagger et al. 2003, p. 84. Kot 2014, p. 112. Unterberger, Richie. "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 8 September 2017. Retrieved 8 September 2017. Wild, Chris (8 May 2015). "Adorable, 21-year-old Mick Jagger gets his hair done". Mashable. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Dick & Reisch 2011, p. 49. Gilmore, Mikal (5 November 1987). "The Rolling Stone 20th Anniversary Interview: Mick Jagger". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Hattenstone, Simon (8 September 2005). "Rock of ages". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Wells 2012, p. 110. Paytress 2003, p. 116. Cohen 2016, p. 153. Andersen 2012, pp. 148–149. "Inside Allen Klein's Role in 1967 Jagger-Richards Drug Bust". Rolling Stone. 11 August 2015. Archived from the original on 11 February 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "BBC On This Day | 10 | 1967: Two Rolling Stones on drugs charges". BBC News. 10 May 1967. Archived from the original on 10 February 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. Booth 2000, pp. 271–278. Jagger et al. 2003, p. 128. Davis, Stephen (2001). Old Gods Almost Dead: The 40-Year Odyssey of the Rolling Stones. Crown/Archetype. ISBN 978-0-7679-0956-3. Archived from the original on 18 September 2017. Retrieved 17 November 2021. Wyman 2002, p. 329. The Rolling Stones (1969). The Stones in the Park (DVD released 2006). Network Studios. "Mick Jagger: we will play same set list at Hyde Park gig as in 1969". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 20 October 2013. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "Hyde Park London Setlist: 13th July 2013 – The Rolling Stones". The Rolling Stones. Archived from the original on 23 May 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "The Rolling Stones release iconic Hyde Park 1969 performance on Blu-ray". AXS. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. Lee, Henry K. (26 May 2005). "Altamont 'cold case' is being closed Theory of second stabber debunked by Sheriff's Dept". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 16 November 2008. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (10 January 2022). "Lost footage of Rolling Stones at notorious Altamont festival uncovered". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 July 2023. Greene, Andy (24 July 2023). "Revisit The Rolling Stones Infamous 1972 North American Tour on New Podcast". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 2 August 2023. "Stargrove – Hampshire Garden Trust Research". Hampshire Gardens Trust. Archived from the original on 9 November 2016. Retrieved 26 August 2017. Janovitz, Bill (2013). Rocks off: 50 tracks that tell the story of The Rolling Stones. New York: St. Martin's Press. pp. 189–191. ISBN 978-1-250-02632-3. OCLC 811597730. The National (26 June 2016). "Rolling Stones' Mobile Recording Truck – Inside Tour". Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 1 September 2017 – via YouTube. Blauvelt, Christian (13 February 2019). "'Performance': Inside the Rock 'n' Roll Movie Too Shocking for the '60s". IndieWire. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2021. Crean, Jeffrey (2024). The Fear of Chinese Power: an International History. New Approaches to International History series. London, UK: Bloomsbury Academic. p. 117. ISBN 978-1-350-23394-2. Carter, Ben (25 February 2014). "Which country has the highest tax rate?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "How the Budget affects you: The public give their verdict". WalesOnline. 22 April 2009. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. Andersen 2012, p. 247. Richards & Fox 2010, p. 236. Day, Elizabeth (12 November 2011). "The Rolling Stones: that 50-year itch…". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 August 2017. Retrieved 17 August 2017. Staff (22 May 2014). "Stones Manager Loewenstein Dies". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 May 2014. Retrieved 23 May 2014. "Why Mick Jagger Never Goes Out of Style". Vogue. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. "The world's greatest band, captured in its prime". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 2 June 2020. Retrieved 6 November 2019. "The Best Rolling Stones Songs That Don't Really Sound Like the Rolling Stones". Pitchfork. 22 April 2019. Archived from the original on 6 November 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2019. Brown, Mark (17 March 2009). "Mick Jagger's jumpsuit is a gas, gas, gas: V&A galleries open". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 6 November 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2019. Hamilton, Jack. "How 'Exile on Main St.' Killed the Rolling Stones". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 7 July 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. "500 Greatest Albums of All Time". Rolling Stone. 31 May 2012. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Smith, Sid. "BBC – Music – Review of The Rolling Stones – Exile On Main St". BBC. Archived from the original on 21 February 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Hall, Russell (20 February 2008). "Deepest Cut: The Rolling Stones Let It Loose from 1972's Exile on Main St.". Gibson Lifestyle. Retrieved 15 July 2022.[permanent dead link] Kohler, Jerry (13 February 1972). "'Jamming With Edward' Jammed With Low Spots". The Kansas City Star. p. 116. Retrieved 16 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Muretich, James; Buckingham, Brooker; McEwen, Mary-Lynn (25 June 1995). "Recent Releases – Jamming with Edward". Calgary Herald. p. 20. Retrieved 16 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. "Goats Head Soup". The Rolling Stones. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Goats Head Soup – album review". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 7 July 2013. Retrieved 14 July 2013. Margotin & Guesdon 2016, pp. 514, 528. Wyman 2002, p. 408. Wyman 2002, pp. 361, 412. Turner, Steve (6 December 1874). "Making The Stones' New Album". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 3 February 2013. Retrieved 11 October 2017. Jagger, M., Richards, R. (1974). [Liner notes]. In It's Only Rock'n'Roll [Vinyl, LP, Album, Reissue]. Rolling Stones Records. "it's-only-rock-'n'-roll | full Official Chart History". Official Charts Company. Retrieved 11 October 2017. "it's-only-rock-and-roll | full Official Chart History". Official Charts Company. Retrieved 11 October 2017. Landau, Jon (16 December 1974). "It's Only Rock 'n Roll". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 11 October 2017. Jagger et al. 2003, p. 174. "He'll Roll On". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. The Associated Press. 16 December 1974. p. 12. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. McGarry, Vincent (31 January 1975). "Taylor & Jagger". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022. Greene, Andy (29 April 2021). "Flashback: The Rolling Stones Perform 'Gimme Shelter' in 1975". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022. "10 Questions for Ron Wood". Time. 24 October 2007. Archived from the original on 10 July 2015. Retrieved 11 November 2021. Egan 2013, pp. 336–350. Nelson 2010, p. 92. "Emotional Rescue". The Rolling Stones. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2018. "Start Me Up". Billboard. Retrieved 18 June 2018. Janovitz, Bill. "The Rolling Stones: 'Waiting on a Friend'". AllMusic. Retrieved 12 November 2014. "Tattoo You". The Rolling Stones. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2018. Connelly, Christopher (14 February 1985). "Stepping Out: Mick Jagger Goes Solo". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Pareles, John (19 February 1985). "Mick Jagger: She's The Boss". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. Ganz, Caryn; Weingarten, Christopher R.; Harvilla, Rob; Montgomery, James; Aaron, Charles; Murray, Nick; Shipley, Al; Grow, Kory; Harris, Keith; Fischer, Reed; Johnston, Maura; Matos, Michaelangelo; Eddy, Chuck (17 September 2014). "100 Best Singles of 1984: Pop's Greatest Year". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 2 September 2017. Retrieved 1 September 2017. Kurlansky, Mark (2013). Ready For a Brand New Beat: How "Dancing in the Street" Became the Anthem for a Changing America. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-1-101-61626-0. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Gilmore, Mikal (7 May 2013). "Love and War Inside the Rolling Stones". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. Andrews, Travis M. (1 March 2018). "Keith Richards insulted Mick Jagger again. This time, he apologized". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 11 November 2021. Lewis, Randy (22 March 2019). "Keith Richards says his '88 solo album 'Talk Is Cheap' made him appreciate Mick more". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2021. Cahoon, Keith (5 May 1988). "Mick Jagger Tour Rolls in Japan". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 15 July 2015. Fricke, David (7 September 1989). "The Rolling Stones: Mick Jagger and Keith Richards' Uneasy Truce". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 16 July 2022. Margotin & Guesdon 2016, p. 574. Giles, Jeff (29 August 2015). "How the Rolling Stones Finally Regrouped for 'Steel Wheels'". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2021. "Flashpoint". The Rolling Stones. Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 19 June 2018. "Rolling Stones' 1991 Concert Film "Live at the Max" Headed to DVD". Rolling Stone. 9 November 2009. Archived from the original on 24 December 2014. Retrieved 22 November 2014. Light, Alan (21 January 1993). "Bill Wyman Quits the Rolling Stones". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 3 July 2022. Hochman, Steve (4 October 1992). "Odd Couple Mick and Rick Finish Album". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on 25 October 2015. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Neely, Kim (26 November 1992). "Keith Richards: Rock's Main Offender". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Williamson, Nigel (24 November 2001). "Epiphany Opens 'Door' To Jagger Disc". Billboard. p. 16. Retrieved 15 July 2022. "Mick Jagger – full Official Chart History – Official Charts Company". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 4 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. "Wandering Spirit". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 8 September 2017. Retrieved 8 September 2017. "Mick Jagger – Billboard Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on 26 February 2017. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Voodoo Lounge – album review". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 4 June 2013. Retrieved 14 July 2013. "The 37th Grammy Nominations". Los Angeles Times. 6 January 1995. p. 3. Archived from the original on 28 October 2014. Retrieved 22 November 2014. "Voodoo Lounge". The Rolling Stones. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 19 June 2018. Rosen, Craig (10 December 1994). "Virgin Act Ends Highest Grossing Tour Ever". Billboard. p. 45. Archived from the original on 18 August 2017. "1994 MTV Video Music Awards". MTV. 1994. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 4 December 2011. * Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Bridges to Babylon – The Rolling Stones | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 13 August 2017. Retrieved 13 August 2017. Kemp, Mark (29 September 1997). "Bridges to Babylon". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 8 November 2019. Retrieved 4 December 2016.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Tucker, Ken (3 October 1997). "Bridges to Babylon". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 29 June 2022. Retrieved 14 July 2022. Paul Moody (20 September 1997). "The Rolling Stones – Bridges To Babylon". NME. Archived from the original on 17 August 2000. "Bridges to Babylon". The Rolling Stones. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 19 June 2018. Udovitch, Mim (19 August 1999). "The Devil in Miss Angelina Jolie". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. Retrieved 21 August 2017. Sandler, Adam (4 December 1997). "Stones rolling tour with VH1, MTV boost". Variety. Archived from the original on 13 August 2017. Retrieved 13 August 2017. "The Rolling Stones". Official Charts Company. 31 July 1963. Retrieved 19 June 2018. "No Security". The Rolling Stones. Archived from the original on 3 December 2014. Retrieved 19 June 2018. Collier, Gene (11 March 1999). "Stones' song list is set for the blues". Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 13 August 2017. "Concert for New York City – Various Artists". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 20 August 2016. "Inside the Rolling Stones Inc. (Fortune, 2002)". Fortune. Archived from the original on 28 May 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2018. "Stones start monster tour". BBC News. 6 September 2002. Archived from the original on 27 August 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2014. Dutka, Elaine (14 December 2004). "Rock 'n' roll legend Mick Jagger won..." Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 11 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Rolling Stones get Guinness satisfaction". Reuters. 26 September 2007. Archived from the original on 3 July 2022. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Jagger vows to keep music rolling". BBC News. 2 October 2007. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2014. Fricke, David; Hiatt, Brian (26 November 2009). "Inside the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 25th Anniversary Concerts". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 10 February 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2021. Greene, Andy (20 May 2011). "Mick Jagger Forms Supergroup with Dave Stewart, Joss Stone and Damian Marley". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 23 May 2011. Retrieved 22 May 2011. Petridis, Alexis (15 September 2011). "SuperHeavy: SuperHeavy – review". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 4 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Hung, Steffen. "Discographie SuperHeavy". Austrian Charts (in German). Archived from the original on 6 November 2012. Retrieved 3 September 2017. "Mick Jagger's New Group SuperHeavy Unveils Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on 17 February 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. "New Music: will.i.am f/ Jennifer Lopez & Mick Jagger – 'T.H.E (The Hardest Ever)'". Rap-Up. 18 November 2011. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 2 January 2012. Doyle, Patrick (15 March 2012). "Mick Jagger, B.B. King Celebrate the Blues with President Obama". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Retrieved 24 August 2017. Mann, Camille (21 May 2012). "Mick Jagger helps 'Saturday Night Live' close out its season". CBS News. Archived from the original on 1 June 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2014. Martens, Todd (12 December 2012). "12–12–12 Concert: The Rolling Stones make a quick exit". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 29 December 2013. Retrieved 14 July 2013. Lynskey, Dorian (30 June 2013). "Rolling Stones at Glastonbury 2013 – review". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 30 July 2013. Retrieved 2 July 2013. "Rolling Stones to return to Hyde Park". BBC News. 3 April 2013. Archived from the original on 7 August 2013. "Rolling Stones Release 'Hyde Park Live' Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on 21 February 2014. Retrieved 19 April 2014. "Mick Jagger duets with singer brother on new album". MSN. 7 December 2013. Archived from the original on 2 July 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2014. "Desert Trip: Paul McCartney and Rolling Stones play legends' festival". BBC News. 10 October 2016. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. Appleford, Steve (8 October 2016). "Rolling Stones, Bob Dylan Thrill With Iconic Songs at Desert Trip Night 1". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. Appleford, Steve (9 October 2016). "Paul McCartney, Neil Young Deliver Powerful Sets at Desert Trip Night 2". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. "Mick Jagger has written not one, but two hideous songs about Brexit". New Statesman. 28 July 2017. Archived from the original on 7 March 2018. Retrieved 6 March 2018. Brown, August (27 July 2017). "Mick Jagger releases two new, politically charged singles". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 23 November 2017. Retrieved 16 November 2017. Blistein, Jon (27 July 2017). "Mick Jagger Gets Political, Addresses U.K. 'Anxiety' on Two New Songs". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017. Retrieved 16 November 2017. "The Rolling Stones postpone tour due to Mick Jagger's health". The Guardian. Press Association. 30 March 2019. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Nedelman, Michael (2 April 2019). "Mick Jagger's having his heart valve replaced. The technology is better than ever". CNN. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019. Retrieved 3 April 2019. Skinner, Tom (24 April 2019). "Mick Jagger makes first public appearance since undergoing heart surgery". NME. Archived from the original on 9 February 2021. Retrieved 9 February 2021. Brooks, Dave (4 April 2019). "Mick Jagger Undergoes Successful Heart Valve Procedure". Billboard. UK. Archived from the original on 4 April 2019. Retrieved 5 April 2019. McDermott, Maeve (5 April 2019). "Mick Jagger says he's 'on the mend,' thanks hospital after undergoing reported surgery". USA Today. Archived from the original on 29 November 2021. Retrieved 29 November 2021. Greene, Andy (16 May 2019). "Rolling Stones Announce Rescheduled Dates For 2019 'No Filter' Tour". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 19 May 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Ryan, Patrick (9 July 2020). "Rolling Stones share unreleased song 'Criss Cross,' announce 'Goats Head Soup' reissue". USA Today. Retrieved 9 July 2020. "The Rolling Stones break Official Chart record as they pip Declan McKenna to Number 1 with Goats Head Soup". Official Charts Company. 11 September 2020. Retrieved 12 September 2020. Savage, Mark (18 April 2020). "Coronavirus: Stars take part in One World: Together At Home concert". BBC. Retrieved 18 April 2020. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (23 April 2020). "The Rolling Stones release Living In A Ghost Town, first original music since 2012". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 April 2020. "Rolling Stones Nummer eins der deutschen Singlecharts – erstmals seit 1968". Der Spiegel (in German). 3 July 2020. Retrieved 6 July 2020. Greene, Andy (5 August 2021). "Rolling Stones' Charlie Watts Drops Out of U.S. Tour After Medical Procedure". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 5 August 2021. Aswad, Jem (5 August 2021). "Rolling Stones Drummer Charlie Watts Is 'Unlikely' to Join Group's 2021 U.S. Tour". Variety. Retrieved 5 August 2021. "Rolling Stones drummer Charlie Watts dies at 80". BBC News. 24 August 2021. Retrieved 24 August 2021. Lawless, Jill; Katz, Gregory (24 August 2021). "Drummer Charlie Watts, Rolling Stones backbone, dies at 80". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 15 July 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2021. "Charlie Watts: Jagger and Richards pay tribute to Rolling Stones bandmate". BBC News. 25 August 2021. Retrieved 25 August 2021. Skinner, Tom (25 August 2021). "Ronnie Wood pays tribute to Charlie Watts: 'I will dearly miss you'". NME. Archived from the original on 25 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. "Bill Wyman pays tribute to Charlie Watts: "You were like a brother to me"". NME. 25 August 2021. Retrieved 25 August 2021. Kaufman, Gil (30 September 2021). "Mick Jagger Opens Up About the Challenge of Touring Without Charlie Watts". Billboard. Retrieved 14 July 2022. Bowenbank, Starr (23 September 2021). "Rolling Stones' Mick Jagger Remembers Charlie Watts: 'He Held the Band Together'". Billboard. Retrieved 14 July 2022. Aubrey, Elizabeth (22 May 2022). "Mick Jagger opens up about losing Charlie Watts: "I do think about him"". NME. Retrieved 14 July 2022. Zemler, Emily (24 August 2022). "Mick Jagger Pays Tribute to Late Bandmate Charlie Watts: 'Thinking of Charlie Today'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 24 August 2022. Grow, Kory (29 March 2022). "Mick Jagger Talks New Song 'Strange Game,' Giving Stones' 60th Anniversary 'A Light Touch'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Legaspi, Althea (1 April 2022). "Mick Jagger Drops 'Strange Game' From New TV Series 'Slow Horses'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Burlingame, Jon (16 June 2022). "Kanye West, 50 Cent, Mick Jagger and Imagine Dragons Are Among Musicians Vying for Emmy". Variety. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Deutsch, Anthony; Davidson, Mike (14 June 2022). Maclean, William (ed.). "Mick Jagger quarantines with COVID, second Rolling Stones show scrapped". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Robinson, Ellie (23 June 2022). "The Rolling Stones bring out Chanel Haynes to perform 'Gimme Shelter' in Milan". NME. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. Robinson, Ellie (26 January 2023). "Mick Jagger is launching his own line of harmonicas". NME. Retrieved 12 May 2023. "Mick Jagger & Keith Richards". ABKCO Music & Records, Inc. Archived from the original on 10 August 2020. Retrieved 10 October 2021. Savage, Mark (19 November 2020). "Keith Richards: 'I'll celebrate the Stones' 60th anniversary in a wheelchair'". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 October 2021. Retrieved 10 October 2021. "IrelandOn-Line". Archived from the original on 12 November 2013. "Stones row over Jagger knighthood". BBC News. 4 December 2003. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2014. Holden, Stephen (12 October 1988). "The Pop Life". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 15 January 2009. Retrieved 28 June 2014. Greene, Andy (18 March 2011). "The 25 Boldest Career Moves in Rock History: 20) Mick Jagger Tours Solo With Joe Satriani". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 5 January 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2011. Sandford 1999, p. 268. Jagger et al. 2003, p. 247. "American certifications – Keith Richards – Talk Is Cheap". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved 16 July 2022. Patell 2011, p. 24. Richards & Fox 2010. Bloxham, Andy (15 October 2010). "Keith Richards: 'Mick Jagger has been unbearable since 1980s'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 1 September 2015. Retrieved 18 August 2015. "Keith Richards blasts heavy metal, rap in interview". New York Daily News. 3 September 2015. Archived from the original on 25 December 2015. Vasquez, Zach (3 March 2020). "Rolling back: why we should welcome Mick Jagger's big screen return". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 July 2022. "Invocation of My Demon Brother". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 12 November 2021. Retrieved 12 November 2021. Dietz, Dan (2015). The Complete Book of 1970s Broadway Musicals. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4422-5166-3. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Nordstrand, Dave (21 October 2004). "The Horror Of It All". The Californian. Archived from the original on 29 November 2021. Retrieved 29 November 2021 – via Newspapers.com. "We Got the Dune We Deserved: Jodorowsky's Dune". Tor.com. 18 March 2014. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 27 September 2014. "Jodorowsky's Dune: The greatest acid sci-fi cult film never made". The Sydney Morning Herald. 2 August 2014. Archived from the original on 30 September 2014. Retrieved 27 September 2014. Malcolm, Derek (12 January 2000). "Les Blank: Burden of Dreams". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Cox, Alex (2016). Alex Cox's Introduction to Film: A Director's Perspective. Oldcastle Books. ISBN 978-1-84344-747-4. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Faulk, Dr Barry; Harrison, Brady (2014). Punk Rock Warlord: the Life and Work of Joe Strummer. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. ISBN 978-1-4724-1055-9. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Rainer, Peter (20 January 1992). "The Future Is Grungy in 'Freejack'". Los Angeles Times. p. 267. Retrieved 16 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Holden, Stephen (26 November 1997). "Movie Review – Film Review; Sent From Gay Berlin To Labor at Dachau". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Scott, A.O. (2 October 2002). "Movie Review – Film Review; It May Sound Like Faust, But the Body Is the Lure". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Travers, Peter (8 October 2002). "The Man From Elysian Fields". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Lacher, Irene (15 March 1995). "Jagger 'n' Tisch: It's Not Just Lip Service". Los Angeles Times. p. 178. Retrieved 16 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Low, Elaine (24 January 2020). "Mick Jagger's Rainy Day Podcasts, Warner Bros. Digital Networks Sign First-Look Deal". Variety. Retrieved 16 July 2022. "Jagger, Tisch form film company". United Press International. 15 March 1995. Retrieved 16 July 2022. "Jagger's New Swagger: Mick Moves to Movies, Blasts Idea of Memoir". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 6 March 2018. Retrieved 6 March 2018. ""Being Mick" Mick Jagger Solo album Special on ABC, November 2001". YouTube. Archived from the original on 12 November 2021. Retrieved 12 November 2021. "Where to Watch Being Mick". Reelgood.com. 4 May 2017. Archived from the original on 24 May 2015. Retrieved 16 March 2019. Ascher, Rebecca (5 November 2004). "Long-planned remake of 'The Women' in development". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 6 June 2011. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "The Women at". Hollywood.com. Archived from the original on 12 July 2011. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "Shine a Light | Movies". OutNow.CH. 17 April 2008. Archived from the original on 28 September 2011. Retrieved 5 November 2011. McCarthy, Todd (7 February 2008). "Review: 'Shine a Light'". Variety. Archived from the original on 2 September 2017. Retrieved 1 September 2017. Morfoot, Addie (22 July 2014). "Mick Jagger on James Brown: 'He Was Very Generous and Kind With Me and He Wasn't Kind With Everybody'". Variety. Archived from the original on 17 October 2014. Retrieved 17 October 2014. Andreeva, Nellie (22 June 2016). "'Vinyl' Canceled: HBO Scraps Plans For Revamped Season 2". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 18 November 2017. Retrieved 29 November 2017. Spencer, Whitney (6 March 2020). "The Burnt Orange Heresy". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on 12 November 2021. Retrieved 12 November 2021. McNary, Dave (6 September 2018). "Mick Jagger Joins Heist Thriller 'Burnt Orange Heresy'". Variety. Archived from the original on 8 September 2018. Retrieved 8 September 2018. Millar, Stuart (14 August 1999). "Jagger and Jerry split made final". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 October 2015. Retrieved 8 October 2015. "Jagger marriage annulled". BBC News. 13 August 1999. Archived from the original on 28 October 2002. Retrieved 8 October 2015. Greene, Richard Allen; Mier, Alberto (9 December 2016). "Mick Jagger's family just got a lot more complicated". CNN. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. Manno, Jackie (4 August 2021). "Here's How Many Grandchildren Mick Jagger Has". The List. Retrieved 13 November 2022. Sandford, Christopher (2012). The Rolling Stones: Fifty Years. Simon & Schuster. pp. 40, 48. ISBN 9780857201027. López-Varela, Ana (26 July 2018). "75 cosas extraordinarias que ha dicho o hecho Mick Jagger". Vanity Fair. Retrieved 16 January 2024. Walker, Tim (15 November 2012). "Sir Mick Jagger's former lover Chrissie Shrimpton discovers cache of love letters". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2021. Faithfull, Marianne (1994). Faithfull: An autobiography, Marianne Faithfull. London: Cooper Square Press. p. 198. ISBN 978-3861501169. Harry, Bill (2000) [1992]. The Beatles Encyclopaedia. London: Virgin Publishing. p. 403. ISBN 0-7535-0481-2. Andersen, Christopher (1994). Jagger Unauthorized. Random House Publishing. p. 226. ISBN 9780440214175. "Marianne Faithfull". CBS News. 1 May 2009. Archived from the original on 14 January 2024. Retrieved 16 January 2024. Bowman, David (9 January 2001). "Marianne Faithfull". Salon. Retrieved 17 December 2023. Faithfull, Marianne (1994). Faithfull: An autobiography, Marianne Faithfull. London: Cooper Square Press. p. 150. ISBN 978-3861501169. Jackson, Laura (1997). Heart of Stone: The Unauthorized Life of Mick Jagger. Smith Gryphon. p. 90. ISBN 9781856851312. Faithfull, Marianne (1994). Faithfull: An autobiography, Marianne Faithfull. London: Cooper Square Press. pp. 150, 153, 157. ISBN 978-3861501169. Ann Kolson, "Marsha Hunt's Life is Filled with 'Joy': The Irrepressible Performer has Mick Jagger in her past, old ties to Philadelphia, and a New Book", Philadelphia Inquirer, 16 February 1991. "Mick Jagger's brood: Seven children aged 17 to 46 with five mothers—and now an eighth". National Post. 8 December 2016. Archived from the original on 16 July 2022. Retrieved 16 March 2019 – via The Telegraph. "Mick Jagger's love letters to Marsha Hunt reveal 'secret history' of". The Independent. 12 November 2012. Archived from the original on 6 March 2018. Retrieved 6 March 2018. Fonseca, Nicholas (18 May 2001). "Mick and Bianca Jagger: Remembering their futile stab at marriage". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. "Landlord files to have Bianca Jagger evicted". CNN. 6 April 2005. Archived from the original on 18 August 2010. Retrieved 12 May 2010. "Bianca Jagger bio at Huffington Post". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 31 January 2011. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "Rock Muse Buell Remembers Many Loves". ABC News. 6 February 2002. Archived from the original on 4 April 2017. Retrieved 3 April 2017. Sandford, Christopher (2012). The Rolling Stones: Fifty Years. Simon & Schuster. p. 284. ISBN 9780857201027. Andersen, Christopher (1994). Jagger Unauthorized. Random House Publishing. p. 363. ISBN 9780440214175. Foxe-Tyler, Cyrinda (2009). Dream On. Phoenix Books. p. 202. ISBN 9781597776172. Fonseca, Nicholas (18 May 2001). "Limited Engagement". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "Jerry Hall: The Interview". Harper's BAZAAR. 13 December 2010. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Carla Bruni on her affair with Mick Jagger: 'I thought I'd never fall in love with someone else'". The Telegraph. 16 July 2012. Archived from the original on 4 April 2017. Retrieved 3 April 2017. "France's Sarkozy marries Bruni at the Elysee". Reuters. 2 February 2008. Archived from the original on 12 November 2021. Retrieved 12 November 2021. "Settled: Jagger Child Support". People. 26 May 1998. Archived from the original on 13 August 2017. Retrieved 13 August 2017. "Sophie Dahl: Who are you calling a vulgar pin-up girl?". The Independent. 24 June 2001. Archived from the original on 3 April 2017. Retrieved 3 April 2017. Day, Elizabeth (22 June 2014). "L'Wren Scott: the mysterious suicide of Mick Jagger's girlfriend". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 22 December 2021. Galef, David (Spring 2008). "Time is on my side". Conceive. Vol. 5, no. 1. p. 44. ISSN 1550-8900. Martinson, Jane (18 March 2014). "Let's not drag gender stereotypes into L'Wren Scott's death". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 December 2023. "L'Wren Scott leaves entire estate to Mick Jagger". Houston Chronicle. 26 March 2014. Archived from the original on 27 March 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2014. "Mick Jagger Donates Central Saint Martin's Scholarship to Honor L'Wren Scott". Fashionista. 16 January 2015. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. "First photographs of Mick Jagger's eighth child, Deveraux, released by girlfriend". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 8 September 2017. Retrieved 8 September 2017. "Melanie Hamrick shares photo of baby with Mick Jagger". CBS News. 19 December 2016. Archived from the original on 8 September 2017. Retrieved 8 September 2017. "Mick Jagger Welcomes Eighth Child, Is a Dad Again at Age 73!". Us Weekly. 8 December 2016. Archived from the original on 18 March 2020. Retrieved 18 March 2020. "Jagger's father dies of pneumonia". BBC News. 12 November 2006. Archived from the original on 2 January 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2014. "So what if Jagger went on stage a few hours after his father died? What was he supposed to do?". The Guardian. 13 November 2006. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 13 August 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. "Mick Jagger's father dies at 93". MSNBC. Associated Press. 12 November 2006. Archived from the original on 8 October 2010. Retrieved 15 July 2010. Edwards, Adam (14 November 2006). "RIP Jumping Jack Flash senior". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 13 August 2017. Retrieved 12 August 2017. Ratcliffe, Hannah (15 July 2010). "Sir Mick Jagger visits his old school in Dartford". BBC. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 19 October 2017. "Cricinfo – Money talks". CricInfo.com. 24 April 2008. Archived from the original on 1 August 2011. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "Jagger: I'm having a really good time". FIFA. Archived from the original on 16 December 2014. "World Cup 2014: Brazil fans blame 'curse of Mick Jagger' for their 7–1 defeat to Germany". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 24 August 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. Day, Nate (22 July 2021). "How much are the Rolling Stones worth?". Fox Business. Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2022. "Sir Mick Jagger net worth—Sunday Times Rich List 2021". The Times. 21 May 2021. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 20 May 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2022. "No. 56595". The London Gazette (1st supplement). 15 June 2002. p. 1. "Stones frontman becomes Sir Mick". BBC. 12 December 2003. Archived from the original on 13 October 2014. Retrieved 27 September 2014. Eliscu, Jenny (25 July 2002). "Mick Jagger Knighted". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 12 August 2017. "The Rolling Stones Biography". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 5 April 2013. Retrieved 12 April 2013. "More names join UK Music Hall Of Fame". NME. 18 October 2005. Archived from the original on 7 January 2012. Retrieved 4 December 2011. Michaels, Sean (11 September 2014). "Mick Jagger has 19-million-year-old species of 'long-legged pig' named after him". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 June 2022. Retrieved 20 April 2018. Sroka, Pavel; Staniczek, Arnold H.; Kondratieff, Boris C. (26 July 2018). "'Rolling' stoneflies (Insecta: Plecoptera) from mid-Cretaceous Burmese amber". PeerJ. 6: e5354. doi:10.7717/peerj.5354. PMC 6064637. PMID 30065894. Sherwood, Harriet (9 August 2023). "Statues of Mick Jagger and Keith Richards unveiled in home town of Dartford". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 August 2023. Andersen 2012, p. 3. Andersen 2012, pp. 179–180. Andersen 2012, p. 139. Andersen 2012, p. 265. Andersen 2012, p. 314. "Mick Jagger – The Photobook – UK". Contrasto Books. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 2 March 2011. Morrow, Martin (26 January 2002). "Daddy was a Rolling Stone". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. "Mick Jagger's Supergroup: SuperHeavy". ABC News. Archived from the original on 6 May 2014. Retrieved 27 September 2014. Ratliff, Ben; Pareles, Jon; Caramanica, Jon; Chinen, Nate (30 November 2010). "The Peas and What Follows 'E.N.D.'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 22 December 2021. "30 facts for 30 years – The truth about 'Spitting Image'". ITV. Archived from the original on 28 September 2019. Retrieved 28 September 2019. McMillian, John (2013). Beatles Vs. Stones. Simon and Schuster. p. 227. Kennedy, Kostya (26 July 2018). "Mick Jagger Said He'd Rather 'Be Dead' Than Sing 'Satisfaction' at 45. Now He's 75 and Still Playing It". Time. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2022. "New faces on Sgt Pepper album cover for artist Peter Blake's 80th birthday". The Guardian. 9 November 2016. Archived from the original on 5 November 2016. Lee, Jenny (24 November 2006). "Fit like Mick: You can do it too". The Vancouver Sun. p. 35. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 5 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Horton, Gary (16 November 2005). "Mick for Prez – Can't Get No Satisfaction With Bush". The Signal. p. 8. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 5 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. McCracken, Ron (17 November 1994). "Runnin' Jack Flash". Fort Worth Star-Telegram. p. 123. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 5 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Valenti, Lauren (15 May 2019). "At 75, Mick Jagger Shares His Incredible Post-Heart Surgery Dance Moves". Vogue. Archived from the original on 18 September 2021. Retrieved 5 July 2022. Norman, Philip (1984). Symphony for the Devil: the Rolling Stones Story. Linden Press/Simon & Schuster. p. 173. ISBN 978-0671449759. Pattie, David (2007). Rock music in performance. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 156. ISBN 978-1-4039-4746-8. Whiteley, Sheila (1997). Sexing the groove: popular music and gender. Routledge. p. 67. ISBN 0-415-14670-4. Frith, Simon (1998). Performing rites: on the value of popular music. Harvard University Press. p. 171. ISBN 0-674-66196-6. Hicks, Michael (2001). "Sixties Rock: Garage, psychedelic, and other satisfactions". Australasian Journal of American Studies. 20: 107. JSTOR 41053856. Retrieved 16 July 2022. Van Zandt, Steven (18 August 2015). "100 Greatest Artists: The Rolling Stones". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 10 October 2011. "Mick Jagger: the Rolling Stone who changed music". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 17 August 2017. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Mick Jagger Biography". AllMusic. Retrieved 5 December 2010. "Mick Jagger gets political on two new songs". MSN. Archived from the original on 31 August 2017. Retrieved 31 August 2017. Strauss, Neil (3 September 1994). "Rock Review: Evidence of Mick Jagger's Influence". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 13 July 2022. "The 25 Best Rock Frontmen (and Women) of All Time". Billboard. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 31 August 2017. Sandford, Christopher (1998). Bowie: Loving the Alien. Da Capo Press. p. 29. ISBN 0-306-80854-4. Price, Steven D. (2007). 1001 Insults, Put-Downs, & Comebacks. Globe Pequot Press. p. 172. Kravitz, Lenny (3 December 2010). "100 Greatest Singers: Mick Jagger". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 10 October 2011. Retrieved 3 October 2011. Jagger et al. 2003, p. 136. Langley, William (26 July 2013). "Mick Jagger: the Rolling Stone who changed music". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 15 August 2017. Serwer, Andy (30 September 2002). "Inside the Rolling Stones Inc". CNN. Archived from the original on 28 September 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2021. Atkinson, Katie; Bain, Katie; Brown, Eric Renner; Denis, Kyle; DiGiacomo, Frank; Duffy, Thom; Fajardo, Ingrid; Grein, Paul; Havens, Lyndsey; Lipshutz, Jason; Lynch, Joe; Mims, Taylor; Newman, Melinda; Raygoza, Isabela; Unterberger, Andrew (16 August 2023). "The 50 Greatest Rock Lead Singers of All Time". Billboard. Retrieved 17 August 2023. Carucci, John (6 December 2012). "Bon Jovi talks charity, tour". The Times and Democrat. The Associated Press. p. 6. Retrieved 16 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Bolen, Jean Shinoda (1989). Gods in everyman: a new psychology of men's lives and loves. Harper & Row. p. 257. ISBN 0-06-250098-8. Blake, John (18 February 2017). "I've got Mick Jagger's lost memoir". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 19 February 2017. Lawrence, Will (May 2008). "King Charles". Q. No. 262. p. 46. Ivor, Davis (10 August 1969). "Richardson, Jagger Feuding Down Under With Aussies". Los Angeles Times. p. 512. Archived from the original on 18 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021 – via Newspapers.com. Kelly, Kevin (17 September 1970). "Movie 'Performance' strangely fascinating". The Boston Globe. p. 39. Archived from the original on 18 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021 – via Newspapers.com. Reddicliffe, Steven (22 March 1978). "A Spot of Comedy That Could Have Been More". The Miami Herald. p. 35. Archived from the original on 18 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021 – via Newspapers.com. Daou, Diane (21 September 1986). "Jagger still making music, but he's a family man now". The Baltimore Sun. p. 204. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2021 – via Newspapers.com. Culhane, John (17 January 1992). "Villainy defines Mick Jagger's latest career move". The Sacramento Bee. p. 120. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2021 – via Newspapers.com. Morgan, Curtis (26 November 1997). "Modern attitudes toward gays dilute bleak film's power". The Miami Herald. p. 210. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2021. Clark, Ashley (8 February 2016). "Gimme celluloid: a history of Mick Jagger on film". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2021 – via Newspapers.com. Bradshaw, Peter (29 October 2020). "The Burnt Orange Heresy review – Mick Jagger adds dash of malice to arty thriller". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 October 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2021. Cott, Jonathan (11 November 1982). "Jungle Madness". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 24 August 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. Lawson, Carol (23 March 1981). "Herzog Jungle Film Halts As Ill Robards Leaves". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 24 May 2015. Retrieved 16 March 2019. Advokat, Stephen (12 October 1986). "Mick Jagger's latest movie is given a puzzling launch". The Arizona Republic. p. 234. Retrieved 14 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. "In bed with Mick". Evening Standard. 15 November 2001. p. 265. Retrieved 14 July 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Morfoot, Addie (16 September 2008). "'Women' in charge at film's premiere". Variety. Retrieved 14 July 2022. Lowry, Brian (9 February 2016). "TV Review: 'Vinyl'". Variety. Archived from the original on 21 March 2022. Retrieved 21 March 2022. Andersen, Christopher (2012). Mick: The Wild Life and Mad Genius of Jagger. New York: Simon and Schuster, Gallery Books. ISBN 978-1-4516-6146-0. Booth, Stanley (2000). The True Adventures of the Rolling Stones (2nd ed.). A Capella Books. ISBN 1-55652-400-5. Cohen, Rich (2016). The Sun & the Moon & the Rolling Stones. Random House. ISBN 978-0-804-17923-2. Dick, Luke; Reisch, George (2011). The Rolling Stones and Philosophy: It's Just a Thought Away. Open Court. ISBN 978-0-8126-9759-9. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Egan, Sean (2013). "Some Girls". The Mammoth Book of The Rolling Stones. London: Constable & Robinson Ltd. ISBN 978-1-78033-646-6. Greenfield, Robert (1981). The Rolling Stone Interviews: Keith Richards. New York: St. Martin's Press/Rolling Stone Press. ISBN 978-0-312-68954-4. Jagger, Mick; Richards, Keith; Watts, Charlie; Wood, Ronnie (2003). According to the Rolling Stones. San Francisco: Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-4060-6. Kot, Greg (2014). I'll Take You There: Mavis Staples, the Staple Singers, and the March up Freedom's Highway. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4516-4787-7. Margotin, Philippe; Guesdon, Jean-Michel (25 October 2016). The Rolling Stones All the Songs: The Story Behind Every Track. Running Press. ISBN 978-0-316-31773-3. Nelson, Murry R. (2010). The Rolling Stones: A Musical Biography. Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood. ISBN 978-0-313-38034-1. Norman, Philip (2012). Mick Jagger. Doubleday Canada. ISBN 978-0-385-66906-1. Archived from the original on 25 July 2021. Retrieved 28 May 2021. Patell, Cyrus R.K. (2011). Rolling Stones' Some Girls. A&C Black. ISBN 978-1441192806. Paytress, Mark (2003). Rolling Stones: Off the Record. London: Omnibus. ISBN 978-0-7119-8869-9. Richards, Keith; Fox, James (2010). Life. New York: Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 978-0-297-85439-5. OCLC 548642133. Roberts, David (2006). British Hit Singles & Albums (19th ed.). London: Guinness World Records Limited. ISBN 1-904994-10-5. Sandford, Christopher (1999). Mick Jagger: Primitive Cool. New York: Cooper Square Press. ISBN 978-0-8154-1002-7. Tremlett, George (1974). The Rolling Stones Story. London: Futura Publications Ltd. ISBN 0-7274-0123-8. Wells, Simon (2012). Butterfly on a Wheel: The Great Rolling Stones Drug Bust. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-857-12711-2. White, Charles (2003). The Life and Times of Little Richard: The Authorised Biography. London: Omnibus Press. ISBN 0-7119-9761-6. Wyman, Bill (2002). Rolling with the Stones. DK Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7894-8967-8. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mick Jagger. Wikiquote has quotations related to Mick Jagger. Mick Jagger interview, Fort Worth, Texas 1978 from Texas Archive of the Moving Image Official website Mick Jagger at IMDb Mick Jagger at AllMusic Mick Jagger on Charlie Rose Sir Michael Philip ('Mick') Jagger (1943–), Singer and composer: Sitter associated with 33 portraits (National Portrait Gallery) Mick Jagger Joins a New ABC Sitcom 1983 Audio interview with Mick Jagger-discusses Undercover album Classic Rock Central Mick Jagger interviewed on the Pop Chronicles (1969)