The 2009–2010 Baltic League (known as the Triobet Baltic League for sponsorship reasons) is a 16-team football tournament held in the Baltic states. Five top teams from each participating country – Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania – along with the winner of the 2008 season will play a 4 round and 2 legged (excluding final) play-off style knockout tournament. It is held from Autumn 2009 through Summer 2010. Meistriliiga – Levadia (1st), Flora (2nd), Trans (3rd), Kalju (4th), Sillamäe Kalev (5th) Although TVMK initially finished 3rd, they were demoted to 10th place at the end of the season due to severe financial difficulties. The team was later disbanded. Virslīga – Ventspils (1st), Metalurgs (2nd), Skonto (3rd), Dinaburg (4th), Jūrmala (7th) Daugava Daugavpils (5th) merged with Dinaburg FC, with Dinaburg retaining its name. After FK Rīga (6th) went bankrupt Jūrmala were given the freed spot as the next best placed team. A Lyga – Ekranas (1st), Vėtra (3rd), Sūduva (4th), Šiauliai (7th), Tauras (1st I Lyga), Banga (3rd I Lyga) FBK Kaunas (2nd) and FK Atlantas (6th) withdrew from the top league, citing serious differences with the Lithuanian Football Federation. FK Žalgiris (5th) were denied A Lyga license and were demoted to I Lyga. FK Šilutė (8th) were relegated to I Lyga because of their league position. Eventually two I Lyga sides, Tauras and Banga, were awarded the two remaining spots, as they were both promoted to the A Lyga. Dinaburg FC v Vėtra Vėtra v Dinaburg FC The second leg match was scratched and Vėtra advanced to the next round as Dinaburg was ejected from the competition for match-fixing. Nõmme Kalju v SK Liepājas Metalurgs SK Liepājas Metalurgs v Nõmme Kalju Metalurgs advanced to the next round 6–2 on aggregate. Sūduva v Narva Trans Narva Trans v Sūduva Sūduva advanced to the next round 3–1 on aggregate. FK Jūrmala v Ekranas Ekranas v FK Jūrmala Ekranas advanced to the next round 3–2 on aggregate. Tauras v Levadia Levadia v Tauras Levadia advanced to the next round 3–1 on aggregate. Sillamäe Kalev v Skonto FC Skonto FC v Sillamäe Kalev Skonto advanced to the next round 4–1 on aggregate. Šiauliai v Flora Flora v Šiauliai Flora advanced to the next round 4–2 on aggregate. Banga v Ventspils Ventspils v Banga Ventspils advanced to the next round 2–1 on aggregate. Vėtra v Ventspils Ventspils v Vėtra Ventspils advanced to the next round 3–1 on aggregate. Flora v Ekranas Ekranas v Flora Flora advanced to the next round 2–1 on aggregate. Sūduva v Levadia Levadia v Sūduva Sūduva advanced to the next round 1–0 on aggregate. SK Liepājas Metalurgs v Skonto FC Skonto FC v SK Liepājas Metalurgs Metalurgs advanced to the next round 2–0 on aggregate. Ventspils v Flora Flora v Ventspils Ventspils advanced to the next round 2–0 on aggregate. Sūduva v SK Liepājas Metalurgs SK Liepājas Metalurgs v Sūduva Sūduva advanced to the next round 4–2 on aggregate. Sūduva v Ventspils As of 4 July 2010. 4 goals: Vjatšeslav Zahovaiko 3 goals: Viktors Dobrecovs Povilas Lukšys Ričardas Beniušis 2 goals: Andrius Urbšys Dominykas Galkevičius Oskars Kļava Sergey Shumilin 1 goal: Andrey Agafonov Aleksandrs Cauņa Karolis Chvedukas Alexandru Dedov Israel Awenayeri Douglas Vytautas Dragūnevičius Alo Dupikov Aleksandrs Fertovs Antons Jemeļins Nathan Júnior Gatis Kalniņš Jurģis Kalns Vladimirs Kamešs Vitalijus Kavaliauskas Mantas Kuklys Vitali Leitan Deniss Malov João Martins Valeri Minkenen Konstantin Nahk Aleksey Naumov Felipe Nunes Ramūnas Radavičius Nerijus Radžius Deniss Rakels Vīts Rimkus Ivan Shpakov Maksim Smirnov Genādijs Soloņicins Aleksandrs Solovjovs Tadas Špukas Aleksandr Tarassenkov Michael Tukura Egidijus Varnas Aleksejs Višņakovs Eduards Višņakovs Jurijs Žigajevs Artūras Žulpa Official website