Asche zu Asche (German: [ˈaʃə tsuː ˈʔaʃə]; "Ashes to Ashes") is a song by German rock band Rammstein. It was released in January 2001, as the fourth single from their album Herzeleid. The single is also included as a bonus disc in the re-released "Australian Tour Edition" of Sehnsucht. This release contains the 1995 album version of the song, as well as five live tracks taken from Live aus Berlin. It was released exclusively in Australia, as a promotion for the Big Day Out festival (2001), for which Rammstein were a headlining act. Since its release, "Asche zu Asche" has been a staple in Rammstein's live shows. It was the only Rammstein song to have been played in every one of the band's tours until 2013. During performances, the microphone stands would be set on fire near the end of the song and clouds of smoke would cover the stage. The song was played at almost every concert from 1995 to 2002. Initially it was not played during the Reise, Reise tour, but was included again by the end of February 2005, ultimately replacing the song "Rein raus" in the setlists. More recently, "Asche zu Asche" has been absent during most of Rammstein's Liebe ist für alle da tour, but has made some rare appearances in Germany and Denmark, replacing the song "Ich tu dir weh", which was "indexed" (banned) by the German Bundesprüfstelle für jugendgefährdende Medien. During these performances, the effects for "Ich tu dir weh" were used instead of the flaming stand. In the Made in Germany 1995–2011 tour, the song was again on the setlist. "Asche zu Asche" (album version) "Spiel mit mir" (live version) "Laichzeit" (live Version) "Wollt ihr das Bett in Flammen sehen?" (live version) "Engel" (live version) "Asche zu Asche" (live version) Website extras, included as enhanced CD content "Australian Web Archive" (PDF). webarchive.nla.gov.au. 23 August 2006. Archived from the original on 20 February 2002. Retrieved 14 January 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Web's Boulevard - Rammstein and scientific-pop culture