.gr is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Greece. Registrations are processed via accredited registrars and domain names in Greek characters may also be registered. There are five official second level domains: com.gr: for those engaging in commercial activities. edu.gr: for educational institutions. net.gr: Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and network providers. org.gr: non-profit organizations. gov.gr: exclusively for governmental organizations. There are some other unofficial second level domains that belong to registrars offering third level domain name registrations. mil.gr: Exclusively for military purposes. mod.gr: Ministry of Defence sch.gr: local education authorities, schools, primary and secondary education, community education. co.gr: for commercial use (generally not as widely used as .com.gr). Greece applied for the internationalized country code top-level domain (IDN ccTLD) .ελ (.ΕΛ in capital letters) for domain names composed of letters of the Greek alphabet. This was turned down by ICANN in April 2011 because it was too visually similar to .EA in Latin letters should ICANN ever implement such a TLD (EA is an exceptionally reserved ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 code element for Ceuta & Melilla). In 2014, ICANN decided to allow Greece to have the domain .ελ. The right to this top-level domain was handed over to Greece in October 2015, and it became operational on the Internet on 10 July 2018. For the first three months, domains already held under .gr as they already were in Latin or Greek letters or transcribed into Greek characters could be obtained for .ελ only by the holder of that .gr domain. Those restrictions ceased to exist in October 2018. "Η Ελλάδα κατοχύρωσε την ελληνική κατάληξη .ελ στο ίντερνετ". "Inet Hellas". www.inethellas.co.gr. Greek IDN blocked due to non-existent domain "ccTLD applicants who have requested the second and final review". Archived from the original on 2016-03-04. Retrieved 2015-06-17. Report on the Delegation of the .ελ (“el”) domain representing Greece in Greek script to ICS-FORTH GR Συχνές Ερωτήσεις για Καταχωρούμενους ".GR Launches .ελ on 10 July". Archived from the original on 2018-07-28. Retrieved 2018-07-28. IANA .gr whois information .gr registry website Whois for .gr domain names co.gr registration policies