The Fragility Tour was a concert tour in support of industrial rock band Nine Inch Nails' The Fragile album, which took place in late 1999, running until mid-2000, and was broken into two major legs, Fragility v1.0 and Fragility v2.0 respectively. Destinations included Europe, Japan, New Zealand, Australia, and North America. The tour featured increasingly large production values, including a triptych video display created by contemporary video artist Bill Viola. The images displayed on the triptych focused on storm and water imagery. "I don't want to do the standard 'rock band in a hockey arena' show", said Trent Reznor. "I want to up the par a little bit. I think our stage show has had a lot of thought put into it. It's not like a Korn or Rob Zombie show where they just go into the prop cupboard and pull out as much shit as they can. I hope, when people see our shows, they go, 'Fuck, that was smarter than that Korn tour I saw, but not in a pretentious way – it kicked ass.' On our previous tour the audience was our enemy but, this time around, we're best friends with the audience at the end of shows. Everyone's connected." Rolling Stone magazine named Fragility v2.0 the best tour of 2000. The Fragility v2.0 North American leg was filmed and recorded for the live album and double DVD tour documentary And All that Could Have Been, which was released in 2002. On May 20, 2000, Nine Inch Nails performed their 500th gig (in count) at the Lakewood Amphitheater in Atlanta. Before several of the later performances, Recoil's 2000 album Liquid was played over the PA system. On July 9, 2000, the rest of the tour was cancelled due to "band illness". The most notable "illness" was eight days earlier when the band went to London for a concert, and Reznor almost died from a heroin overdose, mistaking the heroin for cocaine, which he was addicted to at the time. He went into and completed rehab in 2001. Trent Reznor – Lead vocals, guitar, keyboards, bass guitar, Prophet VS synthesizer Robin Finck – Guitar, E-bow, lap steel synthesizer, backup vocals Danny Lohner – Bass guitar, guitar, synthesizer, backup vocals Charlie Clouser – Synthesizer, theremin, vocoder, backup vocals Jerome Dillon – Drums, samples "The New Flesh" / "Pinion" "Somewhat Damaged" "Terrible Lie" "Sin" "March of the Pigs" "Piggy" "The Frail" "The Wretched" "No, You Don't" "Gave Up" "La Mer" "The Great Below" "The Way Out Is Through" "Wish" "Into the Void" "Down in It" or "Get Down, Make Love" "Head Like a Hole" "The Day the World Went Away" "Starfuckers, Inc." "Closer" "Hurt" "Something I Can Never Have" was played once in Europe. "Reptile", "Please" and/or "Even Deeper" were added at some shows. Atari Teenage Riot Same as above. Skingame These shows featured shorter and more aggressive set lists. Red Hot Chili Peppers Foo Fighters Atari Teenage Riot Blink-182 The Chemical Brothers A Perfect Circle "The New Flesh" / "Pinion" "Somewhat Damaged" "Terrible Lie" "Sin" "March of the Pigs" "Piggy" "The Frail" "The Wretched" "Gave Up" "La Mer" "The Great Below" "The Mark Has Been Made" "Wish" "Complication" "Suck" "Closer" "Head Like a Hole" "The Day the World Went Away" "Just Like You Imagined" or "Even Deeper" "Starfuckers, Inc." "Hurt" "The Big Come Down", "Get Down, Make Love", "Reptile" and "The Fragile" made a number of occasional appearances. A Perfect Circle These shows featured shorter and more aggressive set lists. Elfman, Doug (2000-06-02). "Quite a Contrast" (fee required). Las Vegas Review-Journal. Retrieved 2008-02-01. "Bill Viola – Video Artist". Gergiev Festival. Retrieved 2008-02-08.[permanent dead link] Kerrang!, 1 July 2000 Heinz, Ryan (2002-02-01). "NIN: It wasn't all it could have been". The Western Courier. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved 2008-02-19. Nine Inch Nails Tour Dates (see Fragility v2.0 section)