The qualifying competition for UEFA Euro 2012 was a series of parallel association football competitions held in Poland and Ukraine between 2010 and 2011 to decide the qualifiers for UEFA Euro 2012. The draw for the qualifying rounds was held on 7 February 2010 in the Congress Hall of the Palace of Culture and Science, Warsaw, with matches set to take place between August 2010 and November 2011. Two host countries qualified automatically. For the first qualifying round, there were nine groups. Six of these groups had six teams (one from pots 1 to 6 below); the remaining three groups consisted of five teams (one each from pots 1 to 5 below). The group competition was a double round robin: each team hosted a game with every other team in its group. Each group winner qualified, along with the second-place team with the most points against teams ranked in the top five in the group. The remaining eight second-place teams were paired for two-game play-offs, with the winner of each total goals tie (or away goals rule, or penalty shootout) qualifying for the finals to complete the field of sixteen teams. Bold indicates champion for that year. Italic indicates host for that year. From 1972 to 1988, Germany competed as West Germany. From 1960 to 1988, Russia competed as the Soviet Union, and in 1992 as CIS. From 1960 to 1980, the Czech Republic competed as Czechoslovakia. The pot allocations for the qualifying group stage draw were based on the UEFA national team coefficient rankings as of the end of 2009. The sole exception was the automatic placement of Spain, as reigning European champions, as the top-ranked team (their coefficient ranking would have also placed them in this position anyway). Each nation's coefficient was generated by calculating: 40% of the average ranking points per game earned in the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifying stage; 40% of the average ranking points per game earned in the UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying stage and final tournament; 20% of the average ranking points per game earned in the 2006 FIFA World Cup qualifying stage and final tournament. The 51 entrants were divided into the following six pots for the drawing of nine qualifying groups on 7 February 2010 in Warsaw, Poland: Notes The co-hosts Ukraine and Poland, which qualified automatically, were ranked 19th (28,133) and 23rd (26,620) respectively. Before the draw UEFA confirmed that, for political reasons, Armenia would not be drawn against Azerbaijan (due to the dispute concerning territory of Nagorno-Karabakh) and Georgia would not be drawn against Russia (due to the dispute regarding the territory of South Ossetia). Armenia and Azerbaijan were drawn together in Group A during the draw ceremony, forcing UEFA to reassign Armenia to Group B, as Azerbaijan had refused to play in Armenia when they had been drawn together during UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying. If two or more teams were equal on points on completion of the group matches, the following criteria were applied to determine the rankings. higher number of points obtained in the group matches played among the teams in question; superior goal difference from the group matches played among the teams in question; higher number of goals scored in the group matches played among the teams in question; higher number of goals scored away from home in the group matches played among the teams in question; if, after applying criteria 1) to 4) to several teams, two or more teams still had an equal ranking, the criteria 1) to 4) was reapplied to determine the ranking of these teams. If this procedure did not lead to a decision, criteria 6) to 10) applied; superior goal difference in all group matches; higher number of goals scored in all group matches; higher number of goals scored away from home in all group matches; fair play ranking in all group matches; drawing of lots.   Group winners and the best ranked runner-up qualified directly for UEFA Euro 2012   The remaining runners-up advanced to the play-offs   Other teams were eliminated after the qualifying group stage The following 18 dates were reserved for group matches in qualifying: 3–4 and 7 September 2010 8–9 and 12 October 2010 25–26 and 29 March 2011 3–4 and 7 June 2011 2–3 and 6 September 2011 7–8 and 11 October 2011 For the first time, Tuesday evenings replaced Wednesday evenings for midweek qualifying fixtures where two matchdays occurred in the same week. This was in order to allow players an extra day to return to their clubs for domestic duty the following week. Consequently, teams were permitted to move the earlier weekend match forward to the Friday evening. Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Notes: The Italy v Serbia match was abandoned at 0–0 after six minutes due to rioting by Serbian fans. The UEFA Control and Disciplinary Body awarded the match as a 3–0 forfeit win to Italy. Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Notes: Tied on head-to-head results. Overall goal difference was used as the tiebreaker. Source: UEFA The highest ranked second placed team from the groups qualified automatically for the tournament, while the remainder entered the play-offs. As six groups contain six teams and three with five, matches against the sixth-placed team in each group were not included in this ranking. As a result, a total of eight matches played by each team count toward the purpose of the second-placed ranking table. Source: UEFA Rules for classification: Counting only matches against teams ranked first to fifth in the group, 1) Points; 2) Goal difference; 3) Goals scored; 4) Away goals scored; 5) UEFA national team coefficient ranking; 6) Lower disciplinary points total; 7) Drawing of lots. The eight remaining second-placed teams contested two-legged play-offs to determine the last four qualifiers for the finals. The teams were seeded for the play-off draw according to the UEFA national team coefficient rankings updated after the completion of the qualifying group stage. The draw for the play-offs was held on 13 October 2011 in Kraków, Poland. The seedings were as follows: The first legs were played on 11 November, and the second legs were played on 15 November 2011. The four play-off winners qualified for the final tournament. There were 665 goals scored in 248 matches, for an average of 2.68 goals per match. 12 goals Klaas-Jan Huntelaar 9 goals Miroslav Klose 7 goals Mikael Forssell Cristiano Ronaldo Robbie Keane David Villa 6 goals Henrikh Mkhitaryan Konstantin Vassiljev Mario Gómez Gergely Rudolf Antonio Cassano Dirk Kuyt Robin van Persie 5 goals Gevorg Ghazaryan Marvin Ogunjimi Mesut Özil Nani Hélder Postiga Adrian Mutu Tim Matavž Zlatan Ibrahimović 4 goals Yura Movsisyan Marcos Pizzelli Marko Arnautović Edin Džeko Zvjezdan Misimović Niko Kranjčar Michal Kadlec Kasper Hämäläinen Ádám Szalai Yossi Benayoun Aleksandrs Cauņa Alexandru Suvorov Alan Dzagoev Roman Pavlyuchenko David Silva Xherdan Shaqiri Arda Turan 3 goals Hamdi Salihi Timmy Simons Haris Medunjanin Eduardo Mario Mandžukić Ioannis Okkas Nicklas Bendtner Dennis Rommedahl Darren Bent Jermain Defoe Wayne Rooney Ashley Young Karim Benzema Yoann Gourcuff Florent Malouda Thomas Müller Lukas Podolski André Schürrle Zoltán Gera Vladimir Koman Darvydas Šernas Michael Mifsud Ibrahim Afellay Wesley Sneijder Ciprian Marica Marko Pantelić Nikola Žigić Fernando Llorente Kim Källström Sebastian Larsson Christian Wilhelmsson Burak Yılmaz Gareth Bale 2 goals Erjon Bogdani Artur Sarkisov Martin Harnik Marc Janko Franz Schiemer Rauf Aliyev Vagif Javadov Vüqar Nadirov Sergei Kornilenko Marouane Fellaini Daniel Van Buyten Jelle Vossen Axel Witsel Vedad Ibišević Miralem Pjanić Ivelin Popov Nikola Kalinić Ivica Olić Andreas Avraam Jaroslav Plašil Jan Rezek Michael Krohn-Dehli Adam Johnson Frank Lampard Tarmo Kink Kaimar Saag Sergei Zenjov Fróði Benjaminsen Loïc Rémy Jaba Kankava David Siradze Giannis Fetfatzidis Kyriakos Papadopoulos Vasilis Torosidis Balázs Dzsudzsák Imre Szabics Heiðar Helguson Hallgrímur Jónasson Giampaolo Pazzini Sergey Gridin Kaspars Gorkšs Ilčo Naumoski Vanche Shikov Anatolie Doroș Mirko Vučinić Elsad Zverotić Ruud van Nistelrooy Steven Davis Paddy McCourt Mohammed Abdellaoue John Carew Erik Huseklepp Hugo Almeida Danny Raul Meireles Kevin Doyle Aiden McGeady Gabriel Torje Aleksandr Kerzhakov Pavel Pogrebnyak Kenny Miller Steven Naismith Zoran Tošić Milivoje Novaković Juan Mata Álvaro Negredo Fernando Torres Xavi Johan Elmander Andreas Granqvist Martin Olsson Ola Toivonen Pontus Wernbloom Tranquillo Barnetta Valentin Stocker Hamit Altıntop Aaron Ramsey 1 goal Klodian Duro Gjergji Muzaka Cristian Martínez Edgar Manucharyan Erwin Hoffer Andreas Ivanschitz Zlatko Junuzović Roland Linz Sebastian Prödl Ruslan Abışov Murad Hüseynov Rashad Sadygov Mahir Shukurov Stanislaw Drahun Syarhey Kislyak Sergey Krivets Anton Putsila Vitali Rodionov Nacer Chadli Eden Hazard Vincent Kompany Nicolas Lombaerts Jan Vertonghen Senijad Ibričić Darko Maletić Sejad Salihović Emir Spahić Ivan Ivanov Milan Badelj Vedran Ćorluka Dejan Lovren Luka Modrić Mladen Petrić Darijo Srna Ognjen Vukojević Efstathios Aloneftis Michalis Konstantinou Milan Baroš Roman Hubník Petr Jiráček Václav Kadlec Tomáš Necid Václav Pilař Tomáš Sivok Christian Eriksen Lars Jacobsen Thomas Kahlenberg Kasper Lorentzen Morten Rasmussen Lasse Schöne Gary Cahill Raio Piiroja Ats Purje Martin Vunk Jóan Símun Edmundsson Arnbjørn Hansen Christian Holst Christian Mouritsen Jari Litmanen Roni Porokara Joona Toivio Mika Väyrynen Yann M'Vila Philippe Mexès Samir Nasri Anthony Réveillère Aleksandre Iashvili Levan Kobiashvili David Targamadze Holger Badstuber Mario Götze Bastian Schweinsteiger Heiko Westermann Angelos Charisteas Georgios Fotakis Theofanis Gekas Giorgos Karagounis Sotiris Ninis Dimitris Salpingidis Georgios Samaras Nikos Spyropoulos Zoltán Lipták Vilmos Vanczák Kolbeinn Sigþórsson Gylfi Sigurðsson Elyaniv Barda Tal Ben Haim I Tal Ben Haim II Rami Gershon Tomer Hemed Beram Kayal Lior Refaelov Itay Shechter Leonardo Bonucci Daniele De Rossi Alberto Gilardino Claudio Marchisio Thiago Motta Andrea Pirlo Fabio Quagliarella Giuseppe Rossi Ulan Konysbayev Kairat Nurdauletov Sergei Ostapenko Vitali Yevstigneyev Artjoms Rudņevs Māris Verpakovskis Aleksejs Višņakovs Philippe Erne Mario Frick Michele Polverino Marius Stankevičius Gilles Bettmer Lars Krogh Gerson Aurélien Joachim Mario Gjurovski Mirko Ivanovski Nikolče Noveski Ivan Trichkovski Jamie Pace Serghei Alexeev Gheorghe Andronic Igor Bugaiov Nicolae Josan Denis Zmeu Radomir Đalović Andrija Delibašić Stevan Jovetić Luuk de Jong John Heitinga Kevin Strootman Rafael van der Vaart Georginio Wijnaldum Corry Evans Aaron Hughes Kyle Lafferty Gareth McAuley Brede Hangeland Tom Høgli Morten Gamst Pedersen John Arne Riise Eliseu Manuel Fernandes João Moutinho Miguel Veloso Keith Andrews Richard Dunne Keith Fahey Kevin Kilbane Shane Long Sean St Ledger Jonathan Walters Stephen Ward Srdjan Luchin Bogdan Stancu Ianis Zicu Diniyar Bilyaletdinov Denis Glushakov Sergei Ignashevich Igor Semshov Roman Shirokov Darren Fletcher David Goodwillie Craig Mackail-Smith Stephen McManus Branislav Ivanović Milan Jovanović Zdravko Kuzmanović Danko Lazović Dejan Stanković Ján Ďurica Filip Hološko Miroslav Karhan Juraj Piroska Filip Šebo Miroslav Stoch Vladimír Weiss Zlatko Dedić Dare Vršič Xabi Alonso Andrés Iniesta Sergio Ramos Emir Bajrami Marcus Berg Alexander Gerndt Tobias Hysén Mikael Lustig Eren Derdiyok Gökhan Inler Stephan Lichtsteiner Marco Streller Hakan Balta Gökhan Gönül Nihat Kahveci Semih Şentürk Steve Morison 1 own goal Valeri Aleksanyan (against Republic of Ireland) Rashad Sadygov (against Germany) Raio Piiroja (against Northern Ireland) Andrei Sidorenkov (against Slovenia) Rógvi Baldvinsson (against Slovenia) Eric Abidal (against Belarus) Arne Friedrich (against Austria) Nikos Spyropoulos (against Israel) Tadas Kijanskas (against Spain) Igor Armaș (against Finland) Gareth McAuley (against Italy) Ricardo Carvalho (against Denmark) Simone Bacciocchi (against Moldova) Aldo Junior Simoncini (against Sweden) Davide Simoncini (against Sweden) Aleksandar Luković (against Estonia) Gerard Piqué (against Scotland) The goal tally takes into account the original result of fixtures that were subsequently forfeited, not the awarded scoreline. UEFA.com (5 February 2010). "Spain among top draw seeds | UEFA EURO". UEFA.com. Retrieved 19 February 2024. UEFA.com (2 December 2009). "UEFA EURO 2012™ Qualifying Draw | Inside UEFA". UEFA.com. Retrieved 19 February 2024. UEFA.com (20 September 2009). "UEFA EURO 2012™ qualifying draw procedure approved | UEFA EURO". UEFA.com. Retrieved 19 February 2024. "National Team Coefficients Overview" (PDF). UEFA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 November 2009. "EURO 2012 qualifying draw in full". UEFA. "Azerbaijan, Armenia not to be drawn together in Euro qualifiers". news.az. 11 December 2009. Archived from the original on 15 December 2009. "Hiddink sad UEFA kept ex-Soviet states apart". ESPN Soccernet. 7 February 2010. "Regulations of the UEFA European Football Championship 2010–12" (PDF). UEFA. September 2009. pp. 6–7. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 February 2010. Retrieved 3 September 2010. Staff (25 March 2010). "England and Wales Euro 2012 qualifying fixtures announced". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 19 February 2024. Jackson, Jamie (25 March 2010). "England fans upset by decision to switch Euro 2012 games to a Friday". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 19 February 2024. UEFA.com (12 August 2010). "EURO qualifying to start in earnest | UEFA EURO". UEFA.com. Retrieved 19 February 2024. "Italy-Serbia match abandoned due to crowd trouble". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 12 October 2010. Retrieved 11 June 2017. "UEFA decision on Italy-Serbia case". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 29 October 2010. Retrieved 11 June 2017. "Draw for the UEFA EURO 2012 play-offs". UEFA. 13 October 2011. "Seedings confirmed for EURO play-off draw". UEFA. 12 October 2011. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Qualification for the 2012 UEFA European Championship. UEFA Euro 2012 at UEFA.com