Justin Drew Bieber (/ˈbiːbər/ BEE-bər; born March 1, 1994) is a Canadian singer. Regarded as a pop icon, he is recognized for his multi-genre musical performances. He was discovered by American record executive Scooter Braun in 2008 and subsequently brought to American singer Usher, both of whom formed the record label RBMG Records to sign Bieber in October of that year. He gained recognition following the release of his debut extended play (EP) My World (2009), which was quickly met with international commercial success and led to his establishment as a prominent teen idol. Bieber was ushered into mainstream stardom with his teen pop-driven debut studio album, My World 2.0 (2010), which debuted atop the US Billboard 200 and made him the youngest solo male act to do so in 47 years. The album was supported by the single "Baby" (featuring Ludacris), which became one of the best selling singles of all time. His second studio album, Under the Mistletoe (2011), became the first Christmas album by a male artist to debut atop chart and saw continued success. Bieber experimented with dance-pop on his third studio album, Believe (2012); its acoustic re-release made him the first artist in Billboard history to have five US number-one albums by the age of 18. Over the next two years, Bieber was involved in multiple controversies and legal issues, which led to a tarnishing of his public image. In 2015, Bieber explored EDM on "Where Are Ü Now" (with Jack Ü), which won the Grammy Award for Best Dance/Electronic Recording. This influenced his fourth album Purpose (2015), which yielded three Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles: "Love Yourself," "Sorry", and "What Do You Mean?". He made UK chart history when each of which simultaneously held the top three spots on the country's chart. His guest performances on the 2017 singles "I'm the One" by DJ Khaled and "Despacito" by Luis Fonsi both peaked the Billboard Hot 100 and made Bieber among the few artists to replace himself atop the chart. The latter also earned him a Latin Grammy Award. His 2019 single, "10,000 Hours" (with Dan + Shay) won the Grammy Award for Best Country Duo/Group Performance. His R&B-inspired fifth album Changes (2020), debuted at number one in both the UK and US, while his standalone duet single "Stuck with U" (with Ariana Grande) debuted atop the Billboard Hot 100. His sixth album, Justice (2021) was supported by the worldwide hit "Peaches" and topped the Billboard 200, breaking Elvis Presley's 1965 record for the youngest solo act to have eight US number-one albums. His eighth US number one single, "Stay" (with the Kid Laroi) was released that same year. Bieber is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, with estimated sales of over 150 million records worldwide. He is credited with four diamond certifications from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). He is the recipient of numerous accolades, including two Grammy Awards, one Latin Grammy Award, eight Juno Awards, two Brit Awards, 26 Billboard Music Awards, 18 American Music Awards, 22 MTV Europe Music Awards (the most wins for any artist), 23 Teen Choice Awards (the most wins for a male individual), and 33 Guinness World Records. Time named Bieber one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2011, and he was included on Forbes' list of the top ten most powerful celebrities in 2011, 2012, and 2013. Justin Drew Bieber was born on March 1, 1994, at St. Joseph's Hospital in London, Ontario, and was raised in Stratford. He is the son of Jeremy Jack Bieber and Pattie Mallette, who were both 18 when Bieber was born, and split up not long after his birth. Pattie worked a series of low-paying office jobs, raising Bieber as a single mother in low-income housing. Mallette's mother Diane and stepfather Bruce helped her raise her son. Bieber has maintained contact with his father. Bieber's ancestry includes French-Canadian, Irish, English, Scottish, and German. In 2012, Bieber claimed "I'm actually part Indian. I think Inuit or something? I'm enough per cent that in Canada I can get free gas", sparking criticism from Congress of Aboriginal Peoples for perpetuating misconceptions about Indigenous people. Bieber has three younger half-siblings; the four have the same father, Jeremy Bieber. Jeremy Bieber and his ex-girlfriend, Erin Wagner, who broke up in 2014 after seven years together, have two children, daughter Jazmyn and son Jaxon. Jeremy married his girlfriend Chelsey in February 2018, and they have a daughter named Bay. Bieber also has a stepsister named Allie, the daughter of his stepmother. Bieber attended two French-language immersion elementary schools in Stratford, Jeanne Sauvé Catholic School and Bedford Public School. In grades 7 and 8, he attended Stratford Northwestern. Former teacher, Kim Booker often recalled fond memories of Bieber as her student, and is featured in several interviews. He attended Stratford's St. Michael Catholic Secondary School, and graduated in 2012 with a 4.0 GPA. Growing up, he learned to play the piano, drums, guitar, and trumpet. In early 2007, aged 12, Bieber performed Ne-Yo's "So Sick" for a local singing competition in Stratford, in which he placed second. Mallette posted a video of the performance on YouTube for their family and friends to see. She continued to upload videos of Bieber singing covers of various R&B songs, and Bieber's popularity on the site grew. In the same year, Bieber busked shows in front of the Avon Theatre steps with a rented guitar during tourism season. While searching for videos of a different singer, Scooter Braun, a former marketing executive of So So Def Recordings, clicked on one of Bieber's 2007 YouTube videos by accident. Impressed, Braun tracked down the theatre Bieber was performing at, located Bieber's school, and finally contacted his mother Mallette, who was initially reluctant because of Braun's Judaism. She remembered praying, "God, I gave him to you. You could send me a Christian man, a Christian label!", and, "God, you don't want this Jewish kid to be Justin's man, do you?" However, church elders convinced her to let Bieber go with Braun. At age 13, Bieber went to Atlanta with Braun to record demo tapes. Bieber began singing for Usher one week later. Bieber was soon signed to Raymond Braun Media Group (RBMG), a joint venture between Braun and Usher. Justin Timberlake was reportedly also in the running to sign Bieber but lost the bidding war to Usher, partly due to the idea that two associated Justins would confuse the market. Usher then sought assistance in finding a label home for the artist from then manager Chris Hicks, who helped engineer an audition with his contact L.A. Reid of The Island Def Jam Music Group. Reid signed Bieber to Island Records in October 2008 (resulting in a joint venture between RBMG and Island Records) and appointed Hicks as executive vice-president of Def Jam, where he could manage Bieber's career at the label. Bieber then moved to Atlanta with his mother to pursue further work with Braun and Usher. Braun became Bieber's manager in 2008. Bieber's first single, "One Time", was released to radio while Bieber was still recording his debut album. The song reached number 12 on the Canadian Hot 100 during its first week of release in July 2009, and peaked at number 17 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in the United States. During fall 2009, it had success in international markets. The song was certified platinum in Canada and the US and gold in Australia and New Zealand. His first release, an extended play titled My World, was released on November 17, 2009. The album's second single, "One Less Lonely Girl", and two promotional singles, "Love Me" and "Favorite Girl", were released exclusively on the iTunes Store and charted within the top 40 of the US Billboard Hot 100. As a result, he became the first solo artist to have four singles chart in the top 40 of the Hot 100 before the release of a debut album. "One Less Lonely Girl" was later also released to radio and peaked within the top 20 in Canada and the US, and was certified gold in the latter. Following the release of My World, Bieber became the first artist to have seven songs from a debut album chart on the Billboard Hot 100. My World was eventually certified platinum in the US and double platinum in both Canada and the United Kingdom. To promote the album, Bieber performed on several live shows such as mtvU's VMA 09 Tour, European program The Dome, YTV's The Next Star, The Today Show, The Wendy Williams Show, Lopez Tonight, The Ellen DeGeneres Show, It's On with Alexa Chung, Good Morning America, Chelsea Lately, and BET's 106 & Park. Bieber also guest starred in an episode of True Jackson, VP in late 2009. Bieber performed Ron Miller and Bryan Wells's "Someday at Christmas" for US President Barack Obama and first lady Michelle Obama at the White House for Christmas in Washington, which aired on December 20, 2009, on US television broadcaster TNT. Bieber was also one of the performers for Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve with Ryan Seacrest, on December 31, 2009. Bieber was a presenter at the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards on January 31, 2010. He was invited to be a vocalist for the remake of the charity single "We Are the World" for its 25th anniversary to benefit Haiti after the earthquake. Bieber sings the opening line, which was sung by Lionel Richie in the original version. On March 12, 2010, a version of K'naan's "Wavin' Flag", recorded by a collective of Canadian musicians known as Young Artists for Haiti, was released. Bieber is featured in the song, performing the closing lines. In January 2010, "Baby" was released from his debut album My World 2.0. The song featured Ludacris, and became an international hit. It charted at number five on the US Billboard Hot 100, peaked at number three on the Canadian Hot 100 and reached the top ten in several international markets. Two promo singles, "Never Let You Go" and "U Smile", were top 30 hits on the US Hot 100, and top 20 hits in Canada. According to review aggregator Metacritic, the album has received generally favourable reviews. It debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200, making Bieber the youngest solo male act to top the chart since Stevie Wonder in 1963. My World 2.0 also debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart, Irish Albums Chart, Australian Albums Chart, and the New Zealand Albums Chart and reached the top 10 of fifteen other countries. To promote the album, Bieber appeared on several live programs including The View, the 2010 Kids' Choice Awards, Nightline, Late Show with David Letterman, The Dome and 106 & Park. Sean Kingston appeared on the album's next single "Eenie Meenie". The song reached the top ten in the United Kingdom and Australia, and the top 20 of most other markets. On April 10, 2010, Bieber was the musical guest on Saturday Night Live. On July 4, 2010, Bieber performed at the Macy's Fourth of July Fireworks Spectacular in New York City. The following single from My World 2.0, "Somebody to Love", was released in April 2010, and a remix was released featuring Bieber's mentor Usher. On June 23, 2010, Bieber went on his first official headlining tour, the My World Tour, starting in Hartford, Connecticut, to promote My World and My World 2.0. In May 2010, Bieber featured in Soulja Boy's song "Rich Girl". In July 2010, it was reported that Bieber was the most searched-for celebrity on the Internet. That same month, his music video for "Baby" surpassed Lady Gaga's "Bad Romance" (2009) as the most viewed, and also the most disliked, YouTube video at the time. In September 2010, it was reported that Bieber accounted for 3% of all traffic on Twitter, according to an employee of the social-networking site. On My World 2.0, Bieber's voice was noted to be deeper than it was in his debut EP, due to puberty. In April 2010, the singer remarked regarding his vocals: "It cracks. Like every teenage boy, I'm dealing with it and I have the best vocal coach in the world ... Some of the notes I hit on "Baby" I can't hit any more. We have to lower the key when I sing live." Bieber guest-starred in the season premiere of the CBS American crime drama CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, which aired on September 23, 2010. He played a "troubled teen who is faced with a difficult decision regarding his only brother", who is also a serial bomber. Bieber was also in a subsequent episode of the series, which aired on February 17, 2011, in which his character is killed. Bieber performed a medley of his singles "U Smile", "Baby", and "Somebody to Love", and briefly played the drums, at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12, 2010. Bieber announced in October 2010 that he would be releasing an acoustic album, called My Worlds Acoustic. It was released on November 26, 2010, in the United States and featured acoustic versions of songs from his previous albums, and accompanied the release of a new song titled "Pray". In October 2010, Bieber released his first book, Justin Bieber: First Step 2 Forever: My Story, an autobiography with text from Bieber and photographs from Robert Caplin. A 3-D part-biopic, part-concert film starring Bieber entitled Justin Bieber: Never Say Never, was released on February 11, 2011, directed by Step Up 3D director Jon M. Chu. It topped the box office with an estimated gross of $12.4 million on its opening day from 3,105 theatres. It grossed $30.3 million for the weekend and was narrowly beaten by the romantic comedy Just Go with It, which grossed $31 million. Never Say Never reportedly exceeded industry expectations, nearly matching the $31.1 million grossed by Miley Cyrus's 2008 3-D concert film, Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus: Best of Both Worlds Concert, which holds the record for the top debut for a music-documentary. Never Say Never grossed a total of $99,034,125 worldwide, becoming the highest-grossing concert or performance film at the global box office. The film is accompanied by his second remix album, Never Say Never – The Remixes, released February 14, 2011, and features remixes of songs from his debut album, with guest appearances from Miley Cyrus, Chris Brown, and Kanye West, among others. Bieber was a participating player in the 2011 NBA All-Star Celebrity Game, held on February 18, 2011, and was named the Most Valuable Player (MVP), scoring eight points (3–11 FG) with two rebounds and four assists. In June 2011, an album track from Never Say Never titled "That Should Be Me" (featuring Rascal Flatts), won him his first award in country music for Collaborative Video of the Year at the CMT Music Awards. Time magazine named Bieber one of the 100 most influential people in the world on their annual list. In June 2011, Bieber was ranked No. 2 on the Forbes list of Best-Paid Celebrities under 30. He is the youngest star, and 1 of 7 musicians on the list, having raked in $53 million in a 12-month period. The same month, his collaborative single "Next to You" with American singer Chris Brown was released. The unfinished video for that song was leaked online on June 6, and the official video was released on June 17. On November 1, 2011, Bieber released the Christmas-themed Under the Mistletoe, his second studio album. It became the first Christmas album by a male artist to debut at No. 1 on the Billboard 200, and sold 210,000 copies in its first week of release. On November 19, 2021, the album was listed among the Greatest of All Time Top Holiday Albums chart by Billboard. The first single from the album, "Mistletoe" peaked at number one on the US Billboard Holiday 100 and Holiday Digital Songs charts. Bieber released "All I Want for Christmas Is You (SuperFestive!)" as the second single from the album, which is a re-recorded version of Mariah Carey's original single, "All I Want for Christmas Is You", with Carey providing vocals on the track. Billboard listed the album and its singles, among the greatest Holiday albums and songs of all time, respectively. In late 2011, Bieber began recording his third studio album, titled Believe. The following week, Bieber appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show to announce that the first single would be called "Boyfriend", and was released on March 26, 2012. The song debuted at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100, selling a total of 521,000 digital units, the second-highest-ever debut digital sales week. Bill Werde of Billboard noted that it failed to debut at number one because the digital download of the track was available only through the iTunes Store, "restricting the buying option for those [who] do not frequent the Apple retail store". "Boyfriend" became Bieber's first single ever to reach the top position on the Canadian Hot 100 by debuting at number one and staying on for one week. Bieber was featured on American hip hop group Far East Movement's song "Live My Life", from their fourth studio album, Dirty Bass, in February 2012. The song emerged online five days before its scheduled release date and peaked within the top 30 of the Billboard Hot 100. The first promotional single from the album, "Die in Your Arms", was released on May 29, 2012, and the second promotional single, "All Around the World" (featuring American rapper Ludacris), followed the next week. The second single from Believe, "As Long as You Love Me" (featuring Big Sean), was released on June 11, 2012. It peaked at number six on the Billboard Hot 100. His third studio album, Believe, was released on June 19, 2012, by Island Records. The album marked a musical departure from the teen pop sound of his previous releases, and incorporated elements of dance-pop and R&B genres. Intent on developing a more "mature" sound, Bieber collaborated with a wide range of urban producers for the release as well as some long-time collaborators, including Darkchild, Hit-Boy, Diplo, and Max Martin. Entertainment Weekly praised Bieber's musical shift, calling the album both a "reinvention and a reintroduction". Rolling Stone noted the deeper voice and more "intense" beats found on the album, although it lampooned one of his euphemisms for newfound sexual maturity ("If you spread your wings, you can fly away with me"). Believe debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, becoming his fourth number-one album. The album sold 57,000 copies in its first week in Canada, debuting atop the Canadian Albums Chart. In September 2012, Bieber was featured on "Beautiful", a song from Carly Rae Jepsen's second studio album Kiss. In October 2012, the third single from Believe, "Beauty and a Beat" (featuring Nicki Minaj), was released. The music video held the record for the most video views in 24 hours when it was released, with 10.6 million views. The Believe Tour, which further promoted the album, began in September 2012 in Glendale, Arizona. On December 14, 2012, Bieber appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show, where he announced plans to release an acoustic album titled Believe Acoustic, which was released on January 29, 2013. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, making Bieber the first artist in history to have five number-one albums in the US before turning 19. Bieber returned to Saturday Night Live as the host and musical guest on the February 9, 2013, episode. His appearance was panned by critics and cast members, including Kate McKinnon, who said Bieber was not comfortable with his hosting duties, and Bill Hader, who said he did not enjoy the presence of Bieber or his entourage. Hader added that in his eight years on the television program, Bieber was the only host who lived up to his reputation. On March 7, 2013, Bieber fainted backstage at London's O2 Arena after complaining of breathing problems throughout his concert performance and was taken to the hospital. Bieber cancelled his second Lisbon, Portugal concert at the Pavilhão Atlântico, which was to be held on March 12, because of low ticket sales. The concert held in the same venue on March 11 did go on as scheduled. In mid-August 2013, a remixed duet version of Michael Jackson's previously unreleased song "Slave to the Rhythm", featuring Bieber, leaked online. In response to criticism over this remix, the Michael Jackson Estate stated that it had not authorized the release of this recording, and has since made attempts to remove the song from as many web sites and YouTube channels as possible. Later, a song titled "Twerk" by rapper Lil Twist, featuring Bieber as well as Miley Cyrus, also leaked. In September, Bieber was featured in Maejor Ali's song "Lolly" with rapper Juicy J. A music video for "Melodies", the debut single of American singer Madison Beer, was released in the same month featuring Bieber in a cameo appearance. On October 3, 2013, Bieber announced that he would release a new song every Monday for 10 weeks as a lead-up to the film Justin Bieber's Believe, which entered production in May 2012 and was released on December 25, 2013. The film is a follow-up to Bieber's first theatrical film Justin Bieber: Never Say Never, with Jon M. Chu returning as director. The first song of Music Mondays, "Heartbreaker", was released on October 7. The second song, "All That Matters", was released on October 14, followed by "Hold Tight" on October 21, "Recovery" on October 28, "Bad Day" on November 4, and "All Bad" on November 11. The seventh song, "PYD" (featuring R. Kelly), was released on November 18; it was followed by "Roller Coaster" on November 25, and "Change Me" on December 2. The final song, "Confident" (featuring Chance the Rapper), was released on December 9, 2013. That same day, it was announced that all 10 tracks would be featured on the compilation album Journals, which would also feature five additional unreleased songs, a music video for "All That Matters", and a trailer for Believe. Journals was only available for purchase via iTunes for a limited time: from December 23, 2013, to January 9, 2014. The titles of the five new additional songs are: "One Life", "Backpack" (featuring Lil Wayne), "What's Hatnin'" (featuring Future), "Swap It Out", and "Memphis" (featuring Big Sean and Diplo). Bieber released a song titled "Home to Mama" (featuring Cody Simpson) in November 2014. The same month, Bieber topped Forbes magazine's Forbes 30 Under 30 annual ranking, which lists the highest-earning celebrities under 30 for that year. Because of the disbanding of Universal Music's division, The Island Def Jam Music Group, in April 2014, Bieber and a number of artists were subsequently transferred to another Universal Music-related division, Def Jam Recordings, causing Bieber to no longer be signed to Island Records. In February 2015, Bieber released "Where Are Ü Now", a collaboration with Jack Ü. The song peaked at number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 and reached number one on Billboard's Hot Dance/Electronic Songs chart. It earned Bieber his career-first Grammy Award for Best Dance/Electronic Recording at the 58th Annual Grammy Awards. In March 2015, Bieber made an appearance in the music video for Carly Rae Jepsen's single "I Really Like You". In March 2015, Bieber was the featured roastee in Comedy Central's annual roast special, and was a contestant on the reality competition series Lip Sync Battle. Bieber filmed an episode for the Fox TV reality series Knock Knock Live, and aired before the show was cancelled after two episodes. On August 28, 2015, Bieber released a new single titled "What Do You Mean?" as the lead single from his fourth studio album, Purpose. The song is a blend of teen pop, electronic dance music and acoustic R&B. It debuted at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 and became Bieber's first number-one single in the country. He set a Guinness World Record by becoming the youngest solo male artist to debut at the top of the Hot 100. It also broke the record for the fastest song to reach number one on US iTunes, reaching the top spot in under 5 minutes. On September 4, 2015, Bieber was co-featured alongside Young Thug on the album track "Maria I'm Drunk", from Travis Scott's debut studio album Rodeo. On October 23, 2015, Bieber released the album's second single titled "Sorry", which debuted at number two on the Billboard Hot 100. After eight non-consecutive weeks at number two, on the week charting January 23, 2016, "Sorry" climbed to the top of the chart and became Bieber's second number-one single on the Billboard Hot 100. The third single from Purpose, "Love Yourself" also peaked at number one in the US, making Bieber the first male artist in almost a decade to have three number-ones from an album since Justin Timberlake, who did it previously with his second studio album, FutureSex/LoveSounds, in 2006–07. He also became the first solo artist to chart three solo songs in the top five of the Billboard Hot 100 simultaneously, and the first as a lead act since the Beatles in 1964. "Love Yourself" topped Billboard's Year-End Hot 100 chart in 2016, followed by "Sorry" at number two, and made Bieber only the third artist in history to hold the top-two positions of the Billboard Year-End Hot 100, after the Beatles in 1964 and Usher in 2004. An album track on Purpose, "Company", was announced as the fourth single on March 8, 2016. On February 12, 2016, Bieber's first four albums were released on vinyl for the first time. Purpose was released on November 13, 2015, and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, becoming Bieber's sixth album to debut at the top of that chart. It was the fourth best-selling album of 2015 with worldwide sales of 3.1 million copies. As of June 2016, it had sold 4.5 million copies globally. On November 11, 2015, Bieber announced that he would embark on the Purpose World Tour. The worldwide concert tour started in Seattle, Washington on March 9, 2016. Bieber was the headliner at the 2015 Jingle Bell Ball held by Capital FM, on December 6, 2015. On January 8, 2016, Bieber made UK chart history by becoming the first artist to occupy the entire top three of the UK Singles Chart. He achieved this feat as "Love Yourself", "Sorry" and "What Do You Mean?" charted at positions 1, 2 and 3 simultaneously. On May 13, 2016, he was co-featured alongside Towkio on the album track "Juke Jam", from Chance the Rapper's third mixtape Coloring Book. On July 22, 2016, Bieber released a new single with EDM trio Major Lazer and Danish singer MØ titled "Cold Water". It debuted at number two on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Bieber's third number-two debut on the ranking, passing Mariah Carey's record to become the artist with the most number-two debuts in the US at the time. In August 2016, Bieber was featured on French DJ DJ Snake's single "Let Me Love You". The song peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100. Bieber was also featured on American rapper Post Malone's single "Deja Vu", which later appeared as the fourth single from the latter's debut studio album, Stoney, in September 2016. Bieber then appeared in the documentary Bodyguards: Secret Lives from the Watchtower (2016). At the 59th Annual Grammy Awards, Purpose was nominated for Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album, whereas "Love Yourself" received nominations for Song of the Year and Best Pop Solo Performance respectively. Bieber was the headlining act at the 2016 iHeartRadio Jingle Ball and gave a closing performance on December 9, 2016. On January 28, 2017, Bieber starred in the 2017 NHL Celebrity All-Star Game as a participating player, coached by Wayne Gretzky. On April 17, 2017, Puerto Rican singers Luis Fonsi and Daddy Yankee released a remix for their song "Despacito" featuring Bieber. It was the first song by Bieber in which he sings in Spanish. The remix became a worldwide success and broke major chart records around the world. The song reached number one in the US and joined "Macarena" (1996) as the only English/Spanish songs to reach number one on the Billboard Hot 100. It tied the then-record for the most weeks at number one in Billboard Hot 100 history. The song spent a record 56 weeks at number one on Billboard's Hot Latin Songs chart and broke the then-record for most weeks at number one on the Digital Songs Sales chart. The remix is the most viewed song of all time on the crowdsourced media knowledge base Genius, with 23.3 million views. The song earned Bieber his first career Latin Grammy. As of September 2021, "Despacito" holds the number-one position on the Greatest of All Time Hot Latin Songs chart and number-five on the Greatest of All Time Songs of the Summer chart by Billboard. Bieber, along with rappers Quavo, Chance the Rapper, and Lil Wayne, provided vocals on DJ Khaled's single "I'm the One", released on April 28, 2017. The song debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Bieber's second number-one debut and his fourth song to top the chart. One week later, "Despacito" topped the charts in the US, which became his fifth number-one single and made Bieber the first artist in history to notch new No. 1s in back-to-back weeks. "I'm the One" also reached number one on Billboard's Hot Rap Songs and Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs charts. On June 9, 2017, French DJ David Guetta released "2U", in which Bieber was featured. The first music video for "2U" features Victoria's Secret models lip synching to the song. On July 24, 2017, Bieber cancelled the remaining dates of the Purpose World Tour due to "unforeseen circumstances". According to Pollstar, the tour had a total gross of $257 million and 2.8 million in attendance in 162 shows, becoming one of the highest-grossing concert tours of both 2016 and 2017. On August 17, 2017, Bieber released the single "Friends" with American record producer and songwriter BloodPop. Julia Michaels and Justin Tranter contributed as songwriters, having previously worked with him on "Sorry" in 2015. At the 60th Annual Grammy Awards, "Despacito" received three nominations for Record of the Year, Song of the Year, and Best Pop Duo/Group Performance respectively. Bieber did not attend the show to perform the nominated song, claiming that he would not make any award show appearances until his next album was finished. Bieber was a participating player in the 2018 NBA Celebrity All-Star Game, marking his second appearance at the event. In July 2018, Bieber reunited with DJ Khaled in "No Brainer", co-featuring again with Chance the Rapper and Quavo. The single peaked in the top five of the Hot 100 and reached number one on Billboard's Hot R&B Songs chart. He was also featured in the accompanying music video. On April 21, 2019, Bieber delivered a surprise performance at the 2019 Coachella music festival, marking his first live performance in two years, and teased his return to music with a new album. On May 10, 2019, British singer Ed Sheeran and Bieber released the single "I Don't Care", from Sheeran's album No.6 Collaborations Project. The pair had previously collaborated, with Sheeran co-writing Bieber's 2015 song "Love Yourself", and 2016 song "Cold Water" with Major Lazer. "I Don't Care" became a worldwide hit, reaching number-one in 26 countries, while peaking at number two in the United States. Bieber later featured on a remix of Billie Eilish's breakthrough single "Bad Guy", which was released on July 11. On October 4, 2019, Bieber and country music duo Dan + Shay released the song "10,000 Hours", which peaked at number four on the US Billboard Hot 100. It became the highest-charting non-holiday country song in the history of the Billboard Streaming Songs chart and spent 21 weeks at number one on Billboard's Hot Country Songs chart. As a result, Bieber became the first act in history to reach number one on seven multi-metric charts: Hot 100, Hot Country Songs, Hot Dance/Electronic Songs, Hot Latin Songs, Hot R&B Songs, Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs, and Hot Rap Songs. It earned Bieber his second Grammy Award for Best Country Duo/Group Performance at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards. On October 14, 2019, Bieber became the youngest solo male artist to spend 200 cumulative weeks in the top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100. On December 24, 2019, Bieber announced that he would be releasing his fifth studio album and embarking on his fourth concert tour in 2020. The album's first single, "Yummy", was released on January 3, 2020. It debuted at number two on the Billboard Hot 100. On December 31, 2019, Bieber also released a trailer announcing his 10-part YouTube Originals docu-series Justin Bieber: Seasons, which focused on an array of themes: his life post-hiatus from music, marriage, preparation for new music, and battle against Lyme disease. Episodes were released weekly on Mondays and Wednesdays from January 27, 2020. The docu-series amassed 32.65 million views within its first week of release, breaking the all-time record for the most-viewed premiere in its first week of all YouTube Originals. Appearing on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on January 28, 2020, Bieber confirmed the release date of his fifth studio album, Changes, to be February 14, 2020. The same day, he also released a promotional single for the album, "Get Me" (featuring Kehlani). On February 7, 2020, Bieber released "Intentions" (featuring Quavo), as the second single from the album. The song peaked at number five on the Billboard Hot 100. Changes was released on February 14, debuting at number one on the UK and US Billboard 200 charts, making Bieber the youngest solo artist in history to have seven number-one albums in the US. On May 8, 2020, American singer Ariana Grande and Bieber released the single "Stuck with U", to help raise funds for the first responders of the COVID-19 pandemic and their families. The song debuted atop the Billboard Hot 100, becoming his sixth number-one single in the US. On August 28, 2020, he was featured on the album track "Falling for You" from Jaden's third studio album CTV3: Cool Tape Vol. 3. On September 4, 2020, Bieber played a lead starring role in the music video for DJ Khaled's single "Popstar" (featuring Drake). On September 18, 2020, Bieber released a collaboration with Chance the Rapper titled "Holy", which Bieber called the start of his new era and the first single from his upcoming sixth studio album. It peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100. On October 15, 2020, he released "Lonely", a collaboration with Benny Blanco as the second single from his upcoming album. The song peaked at number 12 on the Billboard Hot 100. Bieber and J Balvin were featured on a remix of 24kGoldn's single, "Mood", which was released on November 6, 2020. On November 20, 2020, Shawn Mendes and Bieber released "Monster", from Mendes' fourth studio album Wonder. It peaked at number eight on the Billboard Hot 100. On January 1, 2021, Bieber released the third single "Anyone" from his upcoming studio album, which peaked at number six on the Billboard Hot 100. On February 14, 2021, Bieber performed "Journals Live" in collaboration with TikTok, which marked his first-ever performance of his 2013 album Journals. It became the first long-form concert event on the platform and broke the record for the most-viewed single-artist livestream in the platform's history. On February 26, 2021, Bieber officially announced that his sixth studio album would be titled Justice. On March 5, 2021, Bieber released the album's fourth single, "Hold On", which peaked at number 20 on the Billboard Hot 100. Justice and its fifth single, "Peaches", were both released on March 19, 2021, and met with generally positive reviews. It debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, becoming Bieber's eighth number-one project, while "Peaches" debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming his seventh number-one single respectively. As a result, Bieber set major records in the US. Bieber became the youngest solo artist to have eight US number-one albums, breaking a 56-year-old record held by Elvis Presley. He became the first solo male artist in history to simultaneously debut a song and an album at number one in the US. He also became the first male act to have his first 6 studio albums debut at number one on the Billboard 200. On Easter 2021, Bieber surprise-released Freedom, a gospel-inspired EP consisting of six songs. On April 11, 2021, Justice led the Billboard 200 by less than 1,000 units, and became Bieber's first full-length album to spend more than one week at the top of the chart in over a decade. On May 10, 2021, DJ Khaled released the single "Let It Go", with Bieber co-featured alongside 21 Savage, from Khaled's twelfth studio album Khaled Khaled. He also starred in the accompanying music video. On June 11, 2021, Bieber made an appearance on Migos's fourth studio album, Culture III, on the album track "What You See". On July 9, 2021, Bieber released a collaboration with the Kid Laroi titled "Stay". The song debuted at number three on the Billboard Hot 100. It later peaked at number one in its fourth week on the chart, becoming his eighth number-one single in the US. "Stay" also became his 100th career entry on the chart, making him the then-youngest solo artist to chart 100 songs on the Billboard Hot 100. It also became the first song by a male foreign act to achieve a Perfect All-Kill in South Korea. "Stay" was the most-streamed song globally on Apple Music in 2022. Bieber was the headlining act for the "Freedom Experience" show at the SoFi Stadium as part of 1DayLA's COVID-19 service event, held on July 24, 2021. On August 13, 2021, Bieber released a remix to Nigerian singer Wizkid's song "Essence", his career-first song in afrobeats. It elevated the song's position to number nine on the Billboard Hot 100. A week later, he released a collaboration with Skrillex and Don Toliver titled "Don't Go". On September 4, 2021, Bieber headlined the 2021 Made in America Festival held at the Benjamin Franklin Parkway in Philadelphia. On October 8, 2021, Bieber released a new documentary film titled Justin Bieber: Our World to give viewers an inside-view in preparation for his 2020 "New Year's Eve Live" powered by T-Mobile, his first concert performance in three years. On October 29, 2021, he released "Rockin' Around the Christmas Tree", a cover of Brenda Lee's holiday classic, on streaming platforms worldwide. On November 15, 2021, Bieber announced the international legs of his upcoming fourth concert tour, the Justice World Tour, scheduled to begin in San Diego, California on February 18, 2022. On November 19, 2021, Bryson Tiller released the single "Lonely Christmas", with Bieber co-featured alongside his long-time collaborator Poo Bear. On December 3, 2021, Bieber released a collaboration with American rapper Juice Wrld titled "Wandered to LA" as the second single from the rapper's second posthumous album Fighting Demons. Bieber was the headlining performer at the 2021 Saudi Arabian Grand Prix held on December 5, 2021, in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. On December 11, 2021, he headlined the 2021 Jingle Bell Ball held by Capital FM at The O2, London. The same month, Justice received 8 nominations at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards. On January 1, 2022, Bieber set the then-record for the most monthly listeners in Spotify history, having achieved a peak of 94.68 million monthly listeners, a record broken by Canadian artist The Weeknd a year later. On February 4, 2022, he made a guest appearance on Beam's debut studio album, Alien, on the album track "Sundown". On February 11, 2022, Bieber headlined the "Homecoming Weekend" bash ahead of the Super Bowl in Los Angeles. On March 4, 2022, Bieber released a collaboration with Nigerian singer Omah Lay titled "Attention". On March 28, 2022, "Ghost", the sixth single from Justice, peaked at number five on the Billboard Hot 100, which marked his 20th career top-five hit on the chart. The song reached number one on Billboard's Pop Songs chart, making Bieber the first solo male artist to have 10 number-one singles in the chart's history. On March 30, 2022, Bieber was featured on the single "Up at Night" by Kehlani, as part of the latter's third studio-album Blue Water Road. On April 15, 2022, Bieber gave a surprise performance with Daniel Caesar at the 2022 Coachella music festival. On April 29, 2022, Bieber released a new single titled "Honest" (featuring Don Toliver) and an accompanying music video directed by Cole Bennett. On August 27, 2022, Bieber released an exclusive single titled "Beautiful Love" for the battle royale game Garena Free Fire. In January 2023, Bieber sold his music publishing rights and recording catalogue shares, up to the end of 2021, to the Blackstone-backed Hipgnosis Songs Fund—a sale valued at over $200 million. In the same month, Bieber was reportedly offered to be a headlining performer at Coachella 2023, but declined to focus on his upcoming seventh studio album. On February 24, 2023, Don Toliver released the single "Private Landing", with Bieber co-featured alongside Future, from Toliver's third studio-album Love Sick. He joined Toliver on stage at the 2023 Rolling Loud festival to deliver a surprise performance of the song. On September 15, 2023, Bieber made a guest appearance on the song "Moments" from American rapper Diddy's fifth studio album, The Love Album: Off the Grid. The same day, he released an acoustic version of the single "Snooze" by SZA. He also starred in the official music video as the latter's love interest. Bieber has cited Chris Brown, Michael Jackson, the Beatles, Boyz II Men, Justin Timberlake, Stevie Wonder, Tupac, Usher and Kanye West as his musical inspirations. In 2012, Bieber said, "music is music, and I'm definitely influenced by Michael Jackson and Boyz II Men and people who were black artists—that's what I like." Believe was influenced by Timberlake, for which Bieber was trying to "create a new sound that people aren't really used to hearing ... like when Timberlake did FutureSex/LoveSounds: It was a new sound... acoustic guitar over hard drums." Bieber incorporates a variety of genres in his music, focusing mainly on pop, R&B, and occasionally dance-pop or EDM. In 2010, Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone asserted that the content of his music was "offering a gentle introduction to the mysteries and heartaches of adolescence: songs flushed with romance but notably free of sex itself". During the initial years of his career, his musical style was noted for being aimed to a more teen pop and "bubblegum-ish" direction. In January 2012, Bieber told V magazine: "I want to do it at my own pace. I don't want to start singing about things like sex, drugs and swearing. I'm into love, and maybe I'll get more into making love when I'm older. But I want to be someone who is respected by everybody." But since then, Bieber gradually altered his artistry, with Peter Gicas of E! Online describing "PYD" as "sexed-up", while In Touch Weekly magazine said that his song with Maejor Ali and Juicy J "Lolly" might make his fans a bit uncomfortable because of its lyrics that refer to oral sex. In 2015 Bieber released the EDM-fuelled album, Purpose, where he collaborated with Skrillex, and explored serious themes such as "life experiences", through "feel-good music". Bieber initially sang with a boy soprano voice, before his voice broke, as was evidenced during the debut performance of "Pray" at the 2010 American Music Awards. Sean Michaels of The Guardian described puberty as "the biggest threat to his career" at the time. Jody Rosen commented that Bieber sings with "swing and rhythmic dexterity" on his debut album, noting his tone to be "nasal". Bieber started to receive voice coaching from Jan Smith in 2008. As an adult singer, Bieber's voice type is tenor, with a vocal range spanning from the baritone A2 to the high tenor F5. In a review of his Purpose album, Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph complimented his "soft, supple and seductive singing". Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian also praised Bieber's "affectedly breathy voice", noting that "the voice soon palls, but the songs are often interesting." Throughout his career, Bieber has sold an estimated 150 million records worldwide, making him one of the best-selling music artists of all time. In 2011, Bieber was honoured with a star in front of Avon Theater in Stratford, Ontario, Canada, where he used to busk when he was younger. On November 23, 2012, Bieber was presented with the Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal by the former Prime Minister of Canada, Stephen Harper. He was one of 60,000 Canadians to receive the Diamond Jubilee medal that year. In 2013, Bieber received a Diamond award from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for his single "Baby", which at the time became the highest-certified digital single of all time. Bieber is credited with four Diamond certifications from the RIAA. Bieber has won two Grammy Awards out of 23 nominations, one Latin Grammy Award, eight Juno Awards, two Brit Awards, 26 Billboard Music Awards, 22 ASCAP Awards, and numerous fan voted accolades which include 18 American Music Awards, 23 Teen Choice Awards (the most wins for a male individual), eight iHeartRadio Music Awards, and six MTV Video Music Awards. He has also won a record 22 MTV Europe Music Awards out of a record 52 nominations (the most for any artist). At age 19, Bieber received the Milestone Award at the 2013 Billboard Music Awards in recognition for breaking boundaries with his creativity and contribution to the musical landscape, surpassing the likes of Taylor Swift and Bruno Mars to the award. All of Bieber's studio projects are certified Platinum or higher by the RIAA and have received numerous accolades. He is the youngest (27) solo artist to have eight US number-one albums, a record held by Elvis Presley since 1965. Bieber is the first artist in Spotify history to have 15 songs surpass 1 billion streams. Following the release of his fourth studio album Purpose, Bieber set major milestones globally. He became the first artist, since Elvis Presley in 2005, to replace his own song as number one on the UK Singles Chart. He is the first artist in history to occupy the entire top three of the UK Singles Chart. He achieved this feat as "Love Yourself", "Sorry" and "What Do You Mean?" charted at positions 1, 2 and 3 simultaneously. The singles also peaked at number one in the US, making Bieber the first male artist since Justin Timberlake in 2007 to have three number-ones from an album. He also became the first solo artist to chart three solo songs in the top five of the US Billboard Hot 100 simultaneously, and the first as a lead act since the Beatles in 1964. "Love Yourself" topped Billboard's Year-End Hot 100 Chart in 2016, followed by "Sorry" at number two, and made Bieber only the third artist in history to hold the top-two positions of the Billboard Year-End Hot 100, after the Beatles in 1964 and Usher in 2004. As of 2021, Bieber has set 33 Guinness World Records, which include eight that were achieved from the success of his album Purpose and was featured in the 2017 Edition. These records included the most streamed track on Spotify in one week, the most streamed album on Spotify in one week, the most simultaneous tracks on the US Billboard Hot 100, and the most simultaneous new entries on the US Billboard Hot 100 by a solo artist, among others. Bieber has attained success on numerous Billboard charts both in the United States and globally. Eight singles by Bieber have topped the US Billboard Hot 100, his most recent being "Stay". He is the first artist in history to chart new number-one singles in consecutive weeks on the Hot 100. He is the youngest (21) male soloist to debut at number one in the US. He is also the youngest (25) male soloist to spend 200 cumulative weeks in the top 10 of the Hot 100. He is the first male soloist to simultaneously debut a song and an album at number one in the US. He is also the first male soloist to spend 59 consecutive weeks in the top 10 of the Hot 100. Bieber is the first artist in history to reach number one on seven multi-metric Billboard charts: Hot 100, Hot Country Songs, Hot Dance/Electronic Songs, Hot Latin Songs, Hot R&B Songs, Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs, and Hot Rap Songs. His hit single "Despacito" has spent the most weeks at number one (56) on Billboard's Hot Latin Songs Chart and is ranked as the greatest Latin song of all time by Billboard. He is the artist with the most number-one debuts (10), most number-one singles (13), and the most cumulative weeks at number one (56) on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 Chart. Bieber is the solo artist with the most cumulative weeks at number one (163) on the Billboard Social 50 Chart. He was named the number one artist on Billboard's Decade-End Social 50 Chart for the 2010s. Bieber was named the "Greatest Pop Star of 2016" by Billboard. He was also Billboard's Year-End Top Male Artist for 2016 and placed number seven on the magazine's Decade-End Top Artists Chart for the 2010s. The magazine also ranked him 55th on the Greatest of All Time Artists and 38th on the Greatest of All Time Hot 100 Artists Charts respectively. Bieber has been credited for reinventing pop stardom for over a decade and has been referred to as the "Prince of Pop" and the "King of Teen Pop" by contemporary journalists. Highlighting his longevity, he was awarded the MTV Award for Best New Artist in 2010 and the MTV Award for Artist of the Year in 2021. Rolling Stone India referred to him as the "biggest popstar of our age", "one of the most captivating artists of the century" and "one of the world's most successful artists of all time". Bieber is often cited as a pop icon, or simply an icon. In a 2011 article comparing the cultural significance of Bieber to Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg, Orlando Sentinel said that, "Out of all the cultural icons who influence and inspire today's society, Justin Bieber is without a doubt one of the most prominent." He is generally credited as an important figure in bridging music and social media, which rose to prominence in the late 2000s; Variety dubbed him "a once-in-a-generation superstar who charted a swift and stunning rise from precocious YouTube talent to global phenomenon." In an article titled "How Justin Bieber revolutionised careers in the music industry" by The Guardian, Tom Fazakerley says that: Social media has transformed the way people, brands and musicians communicate. The likes of MySpace and even more so YouTube, have enabled budding artists to put their music out to a massive audience at the click of a finger. This has taken down the barriers to the music industry and reshaped the career path for budding artists [...] Nowadays you can be your own artist, producer and promoter-and if you do this well, like Justin Bieber, you can really make it. At age 15, following the release of his 2009 singles "One Time" and "One Less Lonely Girl", Bieber's immediate popularity led him to appear on the likes of The Ellen DeGeneres Show, The Wendy Williams Show and Good Morning America. He had achieved a global fandom who came to be known as "beliebers" and his popularity was labelled "Bieber Fever", with fan frenzies taking place in Liverpool, Barcelona and Paris, among other territories. It was revealed in 2020 that singer Billie Eilish was nearly sent to therapy by her mother Maggie Baird due to her "obsession" with Bieber. Bieber's intense fandom was considered to be reminiscent of "Beatlemania", and his signature wings hairstyle at the time also drew comparisons to the Beatles' mop top hairstyle. Bieber's adoration from teenage girls was also likened to those of Frank Sinatra in the 1940s and Elvis Presley in the 1950s. He's the only person in humanity who's grown up the way he has – with smartphones and cameras on him 24/7 ... Another kid can go out and have a good night on the town, and no one gives a crap, but Justin is the most Googled person on the planet – for four years straight! —Scooter Braun, Bieber's manager, in 2013 Bieber maintained his global popularity during his transition to adulthood, achieving increased artistic recognition and credit in the process. In respect to Bieber's success as a teenager to a young adult, Variety said that Bieber is arguably the first mega pop star to come of age entirely in the social media era and also called him an "Internet icon". The Conversation's Jo Adetunji said that Bieber is "one of the most successful pop singers of recent years". Regarding his EDM-driven album Purpose (2015), which reached "beyond the moment and trends" of that period according to Adetunji, the writer argued that Bieber should be considered a serious creative artist. Adetunji compared the album to Madonna's Ray of Light (1998), Alanis Morissette's Jagged Little Pill (1995) and Justin Timberlake's FutureSex/LoveSounds (2006). In an article about Bieber, Hugh McIntyre of Forbes stated, "You may love him, you may hate him, but no matter how you feel about him, nobody can argue that Justin Bieber hasn't conquered the pop world [...] The Grammy winner can turn essentially any track into a smash, and nobody can sell a single like he can these days." Also calling Bieber "an unstoppable force in music", McIntyre lauded Bieber for achieving success in various genres, including R&B, electronic dance, hip hop and Latin. Bieber and his work have influenced various recording artists including Shawn Mendes, Why Don't We, Johnny Orlando, and Niall Horan. Singers Dua Lipa and Charlie Puth have stated that they were influenced by the discovery of Bieber on YouTube which inspired them to achieve the same. Usher commented that while he and Bieber were both signed at the same age, "I had the chance to ramp up my success, where this has happened to Bieber abruptly". As a result, when he was younger, Usher, Braun, Bieber's bodyguard, and other adults surrounding Bieber constantly coached him on handling fame and his public image. After signing Bieber, Usher appointed one of his former assistants, Ryan Good, to be Bieber's road manager and stylist. Good, once nicknamed Bieber's "swagger coach", created a "streetwise look" for the singer which consisted of baseball caps, hoodies, dog chains, and flashy sneakers. Amy Kaufman of The Los Angeles Times comments, "Though a product of a middle-class suburban upbringing in Stratford, Ontario, Bieber's manner of dress and speech ('Wassup man, how you doin'?' or 'It's like, you know, whateva' ') suggest he's mimicking his favourite rappers." In 2013, Bieber said he was "very influenced by black culture", but he neither thought "of it as black or white" nor tried to "act or pose in a certain way". To him, it was "a lifestyle-like a suaveness or a swag". Bieber was often featured in teen magazines such as Tiger Beat, and has been labelled a "teen heartthrob". In 2010, he was frequently criticized for looking and sounding younger than his age, and the following year for an androgynous appearance, which had been commonly noted in the media, including his appearance on the cover of LOVE magazine's androgyny issue in 2011. His signature wings hairstyle at the time brought much attention in particular. His teen-pop music, image (especially as a heartthrob to girls), and the media attention he receives have additionally been criticized. He has been a target of Internet bloggers and message board posters, especially users of the Internet message board 4chan and of YouTube. Nick Collins of The Daily Telegraph said that "Bieber's character appears to strike a particularly sour note with his Internet critics" who have questioned his manner of speech, among other things. In 2013 and 2014, Bieber's teen heart-throb and clean-cut image was drastically affected due to his involvement in several controversial events. During this period, he abandoned his pet monkey in Germany, vomited onstage, was videoed while urinating in a bucket, cursed at a photograph of Bill Clinton, wore a gas mask in public, allegedly spat on fans (although this was later debunked), was involved in an explicit image with a stripper, and allegedly assaulted his bodyguard and a limo driver. Bieber's uncle, Brad Bieber, said that his troublesome behaviour was caused by his break-up with Selena Gomez. In its March 2014 edition, Rolling Stone put Bieber on its cover alongside the title 'Bad Boy'. The same year, Bieber adopted the pseudonym "Bizzle". During the "Bizzle" phase, Bieber donned a quiff and often wore thick gold chains and baseball caps. In his early 20s, following the release of Purpose, Bieber's public image changed in a more positive light. He donned bleached blond hair and often wore rock-branded t-shirts—including Marilyn Manson and Kurt Cobain t-shirts—flannel shirts, denim jackets, and ripped jeans. He also wore kilts, a trend of 1990s fashion, on several occasions. Vogue remarked that his fashion during this period was reminiscent of grunge fashion during the 1990s. After his marriage in 2018, Bieber's persona continued to change. As his fan base got older and he got married, he transitioned away from the teenage heart-throb image, taking on a more mature personality and a more soft-spoken style of speech. In an interview with Vogue in February 2019, Bieber said that he would "laugh at his past self". Wax statues of Bieber with the hairstyle from his early career are on display at the Madame Tussauds wax museums in New York City, London, and Amsterdam. In 2018, "Steps to Stardom", an exhibit on Bieber's early career, opened in his hometown of Stratford, Ontario at the Stratford Perth Museum, offering a collection of mementos from his formative years and rise to international stardom. The items on display include a professional drum kit he owned as a younger child, his Grammy Award, microphones, his Stratford Warriors hockey jacket, and personal letters, including one from Michelle Obama. Bieber made a number of visits to the museum. "Steps to Stardom" was originally scheduled to close in October 2018 but the board of the museum extended its stay for at least another year after the exhibit broke attendance records set by its Anne Frank House exhibit in 2015. At age 17, and within just two years of his professional music career, Bieber was named amongst the Time 100 world's most influential people list and was ranked number 2 on the Forbes Highest-Paid Celebrities Under 30 list. He went on to be included on the Forbes annual list five more times; in 2012, 2013, 2014, 2016 and 2017. He was also included on Forbes' list of the top ten most powerful celebrities in 2011, 2012, and 2013. Bieber's early fanbase developed on YouTube and predated the release of his debut album My World. According to Jan Hoffman of The New York Times, part of Bieber's appeal stems from his YouTube channel. The Chicago Tribune noted that Bieber's fanbase, "Beliebers", was among the top words of 2010. Long before the release of My World in November 2009, his YouTube videos attracted millions of views. Braun recognized the appeal. Before flying him to Atlanta, Braun wanted to "build him up more on YouTube first" and had Bieber record more home videos for the channel. "I said: 'Justin, sing like there's no one in the room. But let's not use expensive cameras.' We'll give it to kids, let them do the work, so that they feel like it's theirs", recalled Braun. Bieber continues to upload videos to the same channel and has opened a Twitter account, from which he interacts with fans regularly. In January 2013, Bieber surpassed Lady Gaga as the most-followed person on Twitter for the first time and held the record for 11 months. As of 2023, Bieber is the third-most-followed user on Twitter and the most-followed musician on the platform, with over 111.5 million followers. His YouTube channel is currently the most viewed music channel for an individual on the platform, having attracted over 31 billion views. With over 72 million subscribers, he remains the most subscribed solo artist on YouTube and held the overall record for six years. 11 music videos by Bieber have surpassed over 1 billion views on YouTube (second most of all-time), his most recent being "Beauty and a Beat". The music video for Bieber's song "Baby" is among the most liked videos on YouTube, having received over 24 million likes since its upload in 2010. Bieber was frequently a trending topic on Twitter when the feature first launched, as his fans frequently discussed him on the network, and was named the top-trending star on Twitter in 2010. In 2010, Bieber signed a deal with Proactiv. In the same year, Bieber partnered with Nicole by OPI to launch a nail polish line "The One Less Lonely Girl Collection", which sold exclusively in Walmart. Bieber's nail polish line sold one million bottles less than two months after its release. Bieber endorsed Adidas, beside Derrick Rose and Venus Williams, in 2012. He became the new "face" and "body" of Calvin Klein in early 2015. Entertainment Tonight reported that Bieber had used MYO-X, a dietary supplement, in preparation for the photo shoot. In June 2015, Bieber teamed up with StarShop, a new shopping app launched by Kevin Harrington. Bieber endorses Beats By Dre, Elizabeth Arden and Best Buy. Bieber has been credited with boosting the careers of other singers such as Carly Rae Jepsen and Madison Beer when he tweeted about them. Bieber has released four fragrances. He launched his debut fragrance, Someday, in 2011; it grossed more than three million US dollars in sales, at Macy's, in just under three weeks, which industry experts regard as a successful celebrity-led launch. On the heels of that 2011 best-seller, he launched his second fragrance, Girlfriend, in June 2012. His third fragrance, The Key, was launched in July 2013, and his latest fragrance, Justin Bieber Collector's Edition, launched in 2014. In January 2019, Bieber launched his own clothing line called "Drew House", consisting of a wide range of products. Most products feature the brand's defining symbol of a simple yellow smiley-face logo with the text "drew" written across the front. Bieber trademarked the name for his company in February 2018. In September 2019, after a year-long collaboration with Schmidt's Naturals CEO, Michael Cammarata, Bieber released his deodorant line, "Here + Now", designed for sensitive skin. In October 2020, Bieber collaborated with Crocs on a limited edition of the brand's renowned clogs called "Crocs x Justin Bieber". The design draws on Crocs' classic clog range with inputs of purple and yellow, inspired by Bieber's personal clothing brand, Drew House. The limited edition clogs sold at select Crocs and partner e-commerce channels, Drew House's website, and Crocs retail stores in China and South Korea. In fall 2021, Bieber collaborated with Tim Hortons to launch a specialty version of Timbits known as "timbiebs". CNN credited the promotion's role in contributing to an increase in Tim Hortons' sales by 10.3% in the fourth quarter of 2021. On February 7, 2022, Bieber starred in Balenciaga's first 2022 campaign alongside Kim Kardashian and Isabelle Huppert. In April 2022, Italian brand Vespa revealed its collaboration with a new limited edition of its famed scooter curated by Bieber. The "JUSTIN BIEBER X VESPA" is modelled on a Piaggio Sprint base – available in 50, 100 and 100cc guise. In May 2022, Bieber and Tim Hortons partnered once again in a new collaboration called the "Biebs Brew", a French vanilla cold brew, which was available in North American stores beginning June 6, 2022. In December 2022, Bieber launched a clean water technology company called "Generosity" that aims to provide sustainable drinking water by reducing the usage of single-serve plastic. Alongside Micah Cravalho, he showcased 150 water fountains at the 2022 FIFA World Cup held in Qatar. Generosity fountains dispense refillable alkaline water after connecting to a water source, and are expected to be commercially available at major venues and homes in 2023. As Bieber resides in the United States, he is reported to possess an O-1 visa for temporary resident status, based on "extraordinary ability or achievement" in a field. Bieber has said he is not interested in obtaining US citizenship, and has praised Canada as being "the best country in the world", citing its mostly government-funded health care system as a model example. However, in September 2018, TMZ reported that Bieber had begun the process of becoming an American citizen, following his marriage to Hailey Baldwin. Bieber owns a $26 million home in Beverly Hills, California as well as a lakeside home in Ontario. Bieber's father, Jeremy Bieber, is a former carpenter and pro-am mixed martial artist. In March 2014, Rolling Stone characterized Jeremy as having "split with Justin's mom when Justin was a toddler, and wasn't always around afterward. But he has, as of late, accepted a place of honor in his superstar son's entourage". From 2008 to 2009, Bieber was in a relationship with Caitlin Beadles; the two remained friends, and Beadles attended Bieber's wedding. From December 2010 to March 2018, Bieber was in an on-again, off-again relationship with singer and actress Selena Gomez. In an interview on The Ellen DeGeneres Show, Bieber stated that some of his songs including "Sorry", "Mark My Words", and "What Do You Mean?" are about his relationship with Gomez. From August to December 2016, he was linked to model Sofia Richie. Bieber became engaged to model Hailey Baldwin on July 7, 2018. They had briefly dated from December 2015 to January 2016 before splitting, then reconciled in June 2018. Bieber and Baldwin reportedly obtained a marriage licence in September 2018, leading to reports that they had a civil marriage. On September 14, 2018, Baldwin said on Twitter that she and Bieber had not yet married, but deleted the tweet afterward. On November 23, 2018, Bieber stated he was married to Baldwin. Bieber and Baldwin had an official ceremony in Bluffton, South Carolina, on September 30, 2019. Bieber has described himself as a faithful Christian, said he communicates with God via prayer, and that "He's the reason I'm here". He reflected his faith in a music video with Brandon Burke, titled "#iPledge", in which he talks about God's forgiveness. Bieber was baptized on January 9, 2014, by Pentecostal pastor Carl Lentz of Hillsong Church, New York, after a born again experience. He has described Lentz as a good friend. In 2021, he announced that he had become a member of Churchome, an evangelical church. On July 24, 2021, Bieber led worship with Gospel singers Kari Jobe and Cody Carnes during the "Freedom Experience" at SoFi Stadium. The trio sang "The Blessing". When asked how he wants to raise his children, Bieber replied, "I'm a Jesus follower. When you accept Jesus, you walk with the Holy Spirit. I just want to be led by the Holy Spirit." Many of Bieber's tattoos have religious significance including the medium-sized cross on his chest and a tiny cross under his eye. Bieber also covered up the "Son of God" text tattooed on his abdomen with a large design that features two angels, gothic arches, a skeleton, and a serpent. Regarding sexual abstinence, Bieber told music magazine Rolling Stone in 2011, "I don't think you should have sex with anyone unless you love them." He added that he does not "believe in abortion", and that it is "like killing a baby". When asked about the case of abortion with regard to rape, however, he said, "I guess I haven't been in that position, so I wouldn't be able to judge that." However, in 2022, amidst Roe v. Wade being overturned, both Bieber and his wife expressed disapproval, with Bieber posting on his Instagram story stating "For what it's worth, I think women should have the choice what to do with their own bodies." His view on sexual orientation is quoted as "everyone's own decision", and he has contributed to the It Gets Better Project, a non-profit group aiming to prevent suicide among LGBT youth. Bieber also opposed the Trump administration family separation policy, calling for Donald Trump to "also let those kids out of cages" in 2019. In 2011, Bieber was among the list of content creators opposing Bill S.978, also known as the Commercial Felony Streaming Act, which would have made unauthorized streaming a felony instead of a misdemeanor. He stated that the bill's sponsor, U.S. Senator Amy Klobuchar "needs to be locked up, put away in cuffs!" While the bill did not ultimately pass, it was later reintroduced by Senator Thom Tillis as the Protecting Lawful Streaming Act and was signed into law by then-President Donald Trump in December 2020 as part of the omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021. Bieber supports Pencils of Promise, a charity founded by Adam Braun, the younger brother of Bieber's manager. The organization builds schools in developing countries, and Bieber became manager for the organization's campaign in Guatemala. He serves as a celebrity spokesman for the organization by running ads for the charity and its campaign "Schools4All". He promises to visit schools that donate the most funds to the organization. He takes part in the charity's fund-raising galas and donates parts of the proceeds from his concerts and Someday line of fragrances, and various merchandising to the charity. In 2010, Bieber supported a campaign for People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) by urging fans to adopt abandoned pets from shelters. Bieber donated his hair to Ellen DeGeneres during his appearance in her talkshow The Ellen DeGeneres Show in March 2011. His hair sold on eBay for more than $40,000 and the proceeds benefited the animal rescue charity, The Gentle Barn. Following the earthquake and tsunami in Japan in March 2011, Bieber donated proceeds from his concerts in Japan to Japanese Red Cross in May 2011. In December 2011, Bieber donated $100,000 to Whitney Elementary School in Las Vegas to provide students from low income families. Bieber supported Charity: Water which is a nonprofit that brings potable drinking water to people in developing countries. On his birthday in 2011 and 2012, he launched his campaign to urge his followers to donate on Twitter. Bieber was named top charitable celeb of 2011 by American news aggregator and blog HuffPost. In 2013, Bieber launched his online #GiveBackPhilippines campaign for helping the victims of Typhoon Haiyan and travelled to the Philippines after raising $3 million. His work in the country earned him a star on the Philippine Walk of Fame. He also supports Children's Miracle Network Hospitals and Alzheimer's Association. In September 2017, Bieber donated $25,000 to the American Red Cross to help people in Texas after the severe destruction caused by Hurricane Harvey. On February 7, 2020, Bieber donated $100,000 to Julie Coker, a 22-year-old fan who works in mental health awareness. Coker revealed that her own past struggles with mental health motivated her to work for mental health. She praised Bieber by saying, "[Bieber] has a big following, so if he has a good message about mental health, hopefully everybody else . . . will want to start thinking about mental health in a different way." In February 2020, Bieber made a donation to Beijing Chunmiao Children Aid Foundation in China to support COVID-19 relief. Bieber and Ariana Grande collaborated on the single "Stuck With U", released in May 2020 as the first of series of singles coordinated by Scooter Braun, who is also Bieber's manager, to support the COVID-19 pandemic. All net proceeds from the song went to the First Responders Children's Foundation to fund grants and scholarships for children of first responders and health care workers who worked on the front lines during the pandemic. By August 2021, the single had raised over $3,500,000. In September 2020, Bieber and Chance the Rapper announced that they've partnered with Cash App and will donate $250,000 to fans who are struggling during the pandemic. In March 2021, Bieber visited the California State Prison in Los Angeles County along with his wife Hailey and pastor Judah Smith at the invitation of Scott Budnick. Bieber met with inmates involved in The Urban Ministry Institute and expressed support for Budnick's Anti-Recidivism Coalition. During the visit, Bieber committed to provide buses to transport relatives of the inmates who have been unable to see them due to the COVID-19 pandemic in California. Bieber described his visit to the prison as a "life-changing experience that I will never forget". Bieber has struggled with mental health issues, particularly depression and anxiety, at various points during his career. He has generally been open about these issues. In his American YouTube docu-series Seasons, the singer opened up about his struggles with addiction with frequent consumption of lean, pills such as MDMA, and hallucinogenic mushrooms in early stages of his career. In January 2020, Bieber announced on his Instagram that he had been diagnosed with Lyme disease. He also revealed that he had infectious mononucleosis, which affected his neurological and overall health. In February 2022, it was reported that Bieber had tested positive for COVID-19, two days after embarking on his fourth concert tour, the Justice World Tour. In June of the same year, Bieber announced that he had been diagnosed with Ramsay Hunt syndrome type 2 and that half of his face was paralyzed. He cancelled and postponed concerts and appearances due to the condition, but returned to live performances in late July. In September, two days after the first concert in Latin America as part of the Rock in Rio festival, it was announced that all remaining dates of the tour would be suspended due to Bieber prioritizing his health. In a statement shared on social media, the singer said that "After getting off stage, the exhaustion overtook me and I realized that I need to make my health the priority right now. So I'm going to take a break from touring for the time being. I'm going to be OK, but I need time to rest and get better." Bieber had several run-ins with the law around the world before his first arrest in 2014, including when he was accused of reckless driving in his neighbourhood in 2012, and charged in Brazil with vandalism in 2013. One of his neighbours in Calabasas, California, accused Bieber of throwing eggs at his home on January 9, 2014, and causing thousands of dollars of damage. On January 23, 2014, Bieber was arrested in Miami Beach, Florida, together with singer Khalil, on suspicion of driving under the influence (DUI), driving with an over-six-month-expired licence, and resisting arrest without violence. Police said that Bieber told authorities he had consumed alcohol, smoked marijuana, and taken prescription drugs. He was released from these charges on a $2,500 bond. A toxicology report revealed that Bieber had THC (a principal constituent of cannabis) and the anti-anxiety medication Xanax in his system at the time of his arrest. In January 2021, he reflected on this event, describing it as "not [his] finest hour" and encouraging fans to "let the forgiveness of Jesus take over and watch your life blossom into all that God has designed you to be." Following Bieber's arrest on the DUI charge, more than 270,000 people petitioned the White House seeking to have him deported from the United States. Although the number of signatures received was sufficient to require a response under published White House guidelines, the Obama administration declined substantive comment on the petition. Immigration Law expert Harlan York noted that the likelihood of Bieber being deported was extremely slim. York stated, "About a decade ago, the Supreme Court ruled that driving under the influence, typically, is not a basis to deport someone." In April 2013, Bieber was criticized for writing a message in the guestbook at the Anne Frank House which read, "Truly inspiring to be able to come here. Anne was a great girl. Hopefully she would have been a belieber." After the message was posted on the museum's Facebook page, Bieber received widespread criticism on social media for perceived insensitivity and narcissism. The Anne Frank House defended Bieber, stating, "He's 19. It's a crazy life he's living, he didn't mean bad [...] He was very interested in the story of Anne Frank and stayed for over an hour. We hope that his visit will inspire his fans to learn more about her life and hopefully read the diary." On July 9, 2014, Bieber was charged with one misdemeanour count of vandalism in California for throwing eggs at his Calabasas neighbour's home in January. Police earlier claimed that they had video footage of him high-fiving friends after the eggs were thrown. With him pleading no contest to the charge, the Los Angeles County Superior Court sentenced him on July 9 to pay $80,900 in restitution, serve two years' probation, complete 12 weeks of anger management, and five days of community service in what the district attorney termed a negotiated settlement. Since then, he has permanently moved to Beverly Hills, California. On August 13, 2014, the January DUI case was settled with a plea bargain; Bieber pleaded guilty to resisting an officer without violence and a lesser charge of driving without due care and attention. He was fined US$500 and sentenced to attend a 12-hour anger management course and a program that teaches the impact of drunken driving on victims. As part of the plea bargain, he made a US$50,000 contribution to Our Kids, a local children's charity. On September 1, 2014, Bieber was arrested and charged with assault and dangerous driving near his hometown of Stratford, Ontario, after a collision between a minivan and Bieber's all-terrain vehicle on August 29. Ontario police said that he then "engaged in a physical altercation" with an occupant of the minivan. He was released shortly and his lawyer blamed the incident on "the unwelcome presence of paparazzi". On September 8, Toronto dropped an assault charge against him originally brought up on January 29 for an incident with a limousine driver in December 2013. In November 2014, he was ordered to appear in Argentina within 60 days by a Buenos Aires court to give testimony on an alleged assault on a photographer on November 9, 2013. When he failed to do so, an arrest warrant was issued and two of his bodyguards were released in Argentina in April 2015. I didn't want to come off arrogant or conceited, or basically how I've been acting the past year, year and a half ... although what's happened in the past has happened, I just want to ... be kind and loving and gentle and soft. —Bieber reflects in a video posted in January 2015 In June 2014, a video emerged of a 15-year-old Bieber telling a joke about black people, which used the word "nigger" multiple times. In the same month, a second video showed a 15-year-old Bieber giggling as he croons his song "One Less Lonely Girl", but parodying the main lyric as "One less lonely nigger", and stating that if he were to kill one, he would be "part of the KKK". He apologized the day the latter was released: "Facing my mistakes from years ago has been one of the hardest things I've ever dealt with." In July 2017, the Chinese government banned Bieber from performing in China. A Chinese Bieber fan contacted the Beijing Municipal Bureau of Culture requesting the reason for the ban. The Bureau released a statement, explaining "Justin Bieber is a gifted singer, but he is also a controversial young foreign singer", and "In order to maintain order in the Chinese market and purify the Chinese performance environment, it is not suitable to bring in badly behaved entertainers." In 2021, Chinese streaming sites Youku, iQIYI, and Tencent Video removed Bieber's scenes in Friends: The Reunion donning Ross Geller's iconic "Spudnik" costume. In June 2020, Bieber was accused of sexual assault by a woman known pseudonymously as "Danielle", who claimed on Twitter that the singer had engaged in non-consensual sexual acts at a Four Seasons hotel in Austin, Texas, in March 2014 while with then-girlfriend Selena Gomez. In a series of tweets, Bieber denied all allegations, stating that sexual abuse "is something I don't take lightly" and provided evidence that he was not at the Four Seasons at the time of the alleged incident. Studio albums My World 2.0 (2010) Under the Mistletoe (2011) Believe (2012) Purpose (2015) Changes (2020) Justice (2021) Justin Bieber: Never Say Never (2011) Justin Bieber's Believe (2013) Zoolander 2 (2016) Justin Bieber: Seasons (2020) Justin Bieber: Our World (2021) My World Tour (2010–2011) Believe Tour (2012–2013) Purpose World Tour (2016–2017) Justice World Tour (2022) List of best-selling music artists List of highest-certified music artists in the United States List of best-selling singles in the United States List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones UK Singles Chart records and statistics List of Canadian Grammy Award winners and nominees Forbes Celebrity 100 List of Spotify streaming records List of most-streamed artists on Spotify List of most-subscribed YouTube channels List of most-followed Instagram accounts List of most-followed Twitter accounts "Justin Bieber Biography". The Biography Channel. A+E Networks. Archived from the original on August 5, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2013. "Inogolo – English Pronunciation Guide to the Names of People, Places, and Stuff – Justin Bieber". Archived from the original on March 6, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2015. "Pop icon Justin Bieber announces 2022 concert in Tel Aviv". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on November 22, 2023. Retrieved December 13, 2023. "Justin Bieber: The Musical Odyssey of a Pop Icon". vocal.media. Archived from the original on December 13, 2023. Retrieved December 13, 2023. Weatherby, Taylor (April 1, 2022). "Justin Bieber's Sonic Evolution: How He Transformed From Bubblegum Pop Heartthrob To Mature, Genre-Melding Artist". GRAMMY.com. Archived from the original on November 6, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2022. "Justin Bieber Tops Billboard 200 With 'My World 2.0'". Billboard. e5 Global Media. March 31, 2010. Archived from the original on June 17, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2013. Peoples, Glenn (May 17, 2013). "Justin Bieber's 'Baby' With New Streaming Data Beats Out Elton John For RIAA's Top Platinum Single of All Time". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 20, 2013. Retrieved May 17, 2013. Caulfield, Keith (November 9, 2011). "Justin Bieber's 'Mistletoe' Brightens Billboard 200 with No. 1 Debut". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 18, 2018. Retrieved November 19, 2021. Sinha-Roy, Piya (February 6, 2013). "Justin Bieber becomes youngest artist with five No. 1 albums". Reuters. Archived from the original on November 6, 2022. Retrieved June 7, 2021. Rivera, Zayda. "Justin Bieber confesses to 'rebelling a little bit': 'I was disappointed in myself'". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on November 6, 2022. Retrieved September 8, 2020. "Justin Bieber Could Never Be the King of EDM, But These Are Some Great Remixes". Complex. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved January 1, 2020. "Justin Bieber Wins His First Grammy Ever: See His Response". Billboard. February 15, 2016. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved August 12, 2020. Trust, Gary (May 15, 2017). "Luis Fonsi & Daddy Yankee's 'Despacito,' Featuring Justin Bieber, Hits No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 6, 2022. Retrieved September 19, 2021. Shafer, Ellise. "Grammys 2021: The Complete Winners List". Variety. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved December 31, 2021. Sisario, Ben (March 29, 2021). "Justin Bieber's 'Justice' Debuts at No. 1, Ending Morgan Wallen's Run". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved November 28, 2021. Diamond-certified singles (listed in order of release): "Baby" (12× Platinum) "Sorry" (11× Platinum) "Despacito Remix" (13× Platinum) "Stay" (Diamond) Forbes Celebrity 100: 2011: "The World's Most Powerful Celebrities 2011". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 5, 2016. Retrieved September 2, 2017. 2012: Mitchell, John. "Jennifer Lopez Tops Forbes Celebrity 100". MTV News. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2014. 2013: Pomerantz, Dorothy (June 26, 2013). "Oprah Winfrey Regains No. 1 Slot On Forbes 2013 List Of The Most Powerful Celebrities". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 14, 2023. Retrieved June 27, 2013. Vlessing, Etan (February 28, 2012). "Justin Bieber's Mom Joins Fight to Keep Canadian Pregnant Teen Shelter Open". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 1, 2012. Retrieved March 28, 2012. Parvis, Sarah E (2010). McMeel, Andrews (ed.). Kansas City, MO. London: Simon & Schuster. pp. 13–17. ISBN 978-1-4494-0181-8. Archived from the original on October 27, 2023. Retrieved August 4, 2010. Marikar, Sheila (November 19, 2012). "Justin Bieber's Mom, Pattie Mallette: 7 Things to Know". ABC News. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2014. Infantry, Ashante (May 14, 2010). "Justin Bieber guide added to hometown of Stratford's tourism website". Toronto Star. Toronto. Archived from the original on January 5, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2011. Hoffman, Jan (December 31, 2009). "Justin Bieber is Living the Tween Idol Dream". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved February 25, 2017. Bieber 2010, pp. 22, 23. "Justin Bieber tops celebrity birthdays for March 1 – Celebrities – Entertainment". Toronto Sun. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2014. Jon Ronson (November 13, 2010). "Justin Bieber: One day with the most Googled name on the planet – Music – The Guardian". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved October 26, 2014. "Justin Bieber gets offer of help tracing native ancestry after free gas comment". Toronto Star. August 3, 2012. Archived from the original on January 16, 2024. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "Justin Bieber chided by aboriginal group for free gas comment". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on January 16, 2024. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "Justin Bieber: Inside The 'Yummy' Singer's Family Relationships, From His Wife Hailey Baldwin To His Parents & Siblings". Capital UK. February 20, 2018. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved May 13, 2021. Thomasos, Christine (March 4, 2014). "Justin Bieber's Dad Jeremy Splits From Longtime Girlfriend Erin Wagner". Celebeat. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved October 18, 2018. Thomasos, Christine (March 2, 2014). "Justin Bieber Birthday: Selena Gomez Not Part of Celebration That Included Father, Little Brother and Sister". The Christian Post. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2014. Bailey, Alyssa (August 16, 2018). "Justin Bieber Introduces the World to His New Baby Sister". Elle. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved August 16, 2018. Thomasos, Christine (August 16, 2018). "Justin Bieber welcomes baby half sister". NewsDay. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2018. Itzkoff, Dave (July 2, 2012). "Justin Bieber Graduates From High School". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved August 20, 2015. Laurie, Kaitlyn (July 15, 2015). "FYI: Justin Bieber Is Actually Smart, Reveals He Graduated High School With a 4.0 GPA". Celebuzz!. Celebuzz.com. Archived from the original on July 22, 2015. Retrieved August 20, 2015. Colurso, Mary (December 17, 2010). "Temperature's rising as Justin brings Bieber fever to Birmingham". Alabama. Archived from the original on May 24, 2012. Retrieved January 11, 2011. Mitchell, Gail (April 28, 2009). "Usher Introduces Teen Singer Justin Bieber". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. Retrieved July 23, 2009. Herrera, Monica (July 13, 2009). "'Time' is right for teen singer Justin Bieber". Reuters. Thomson Reuters. Archived from the original on January 27, 2010. Retrieved July 22, 2009. Fishburn, Alison (February 11, 2020). "How a small-town Canadian museum became a shrine to Justin Bieber". The Outline. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved November 15, 2020. TJ (August 11, 2009). "Neon Limelight Interviews: Usher Protegé Justin Bieber: Accidental Star". Neon Limelight. Archived from the original on May 26, 2012. Retrieved August 11, 2009. Herrera, Monica (March 19, 2010). "Justin Bieber – The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 13, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2010. Vena, Jocelyn; Kos, Saimon (September 12, 2009). "Usher and Justin Timberlake Battled It Out For Justin Bieber". MTV. Archived from the original on May 24, 2012. Retrieved January 11, 2011. "Interview with Chris Hicks". HitQuarters. August 23, 2011. Archived from the original on September 20, 2012. Retrieved August 25, 2011. Mitchell, Gail (April 28, 2009). "Usher Introduces Teen Singer Justin Bieber". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. Retrieved July 23, 2009. Mitchell, Gail (April 28, 2009). "Usher Introduces Teen Singer Justin Bieber". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. Retrieved May 23, 2013. "Justin Bieber - Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2010. "Justin Bieber AIRA Singles Certification". ARIA Charts. Australian Recording Industry Association. Archived from the original on February 8, 2010. Retrieved March 30, 2010. "The Official New Zealand Music Chart". Recording Industry Association of New Zealand. Archived from the original on March 23, 2010. Retrieved March 31, 2010. Note: Week commence on Monday, March 29, 2010 "RIAA – Gold and Platinum – June 15, 2010". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on April 5, 2013. Retrieved January 10, 2010. Hombach, Jean-Pierre (February 22, 2012). "My World (EP)". Justin Bieber. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. p. 63. ISBN 978-1470126797. Hombach, Jean-Pierre (February 22, 2012). "Justin Bieber (Introduction)". Justin Bieber. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. p. 8. ISBN 978-1470126797. "Justin Bieber RIAA album certifications". RIAA. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved January 11, 2010. "November 2010 – Gold & Platinum Certifications". Canadian Recording Industry Association. Archived from the original on April 30, 2009. Retrieved December 15, 2010. "Award - bpi". British Phonographic Industry. Archived from the original on April 24, 2021. Retrieved April 24, 2021. "The Today Show + Justin Bieber=Awesome". Island Def Jam. Universal Music Group. September 11, 2009. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved September 22, 2009. "MTVU VMA Tour live performances". MTV. September 9, 2009. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved September 28, 2009. Markovitz, Adam. "Justin Bieber on 'True Jackson, VP': Watch an exclusive clip". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 15, 2015. Retrieved May 8, 2015. Ram, Archana (December 2, 2009). "Justin Bieber joins Mary J Blige and others for 'Christmas In Washington'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 26, 2012. Retrieved December 5, 2009. "Fergie to host New Year's celebration with Dick Clark and Ryan Seacrest". NBC Miami (Press release). NBC Universal. December 7, 2009. Archived from the original on September 20, 2012. Retrieved December 7, 2009. Kaufman, Gil (February 2, 2010). "'We Are The World' Remake Brings Lil Wayne, Kanye West, Pink, Usher, More Together For Haiti". MTV News. Archived from the original on September 19, 2018. Retrieved February 2, 2010. Shapiro 2010, p. 136. "Justin Bieber – Chart History (Hot 100)". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 25, 2019. Retrieved December 2, 2021. "Justin Bieber – My World 2.0". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved March 23, 2010.[permanent dead link] "Justin Bieber – My World – Music Charts". αCharts. Archived from the original on October 13, 2011. Retrieved April 14, 2010. "Justin Bieber – My World 2.0 – Music Charts". αCharts. Archived from the original on December 25, 2012. Retrieved April 14, 2010. Cheung, Nadine (March 23, 2010). "Justin Bieber Makes Millions Happy With the Release of 'My World 2.0'". JSYK. AOL. Archived from the original on March 25, 2010. Retrieved March 23, 2010. "Justin Bieber Coming Back To NY For Saturday Night Live". Long Island Press. February 21, 2010. Archived from the original on July 13, 2011. Retrieved April 10, 2010. Beja, Marc (July 4, 2010). "Fireworks follow sun-scorched July 4 festivals". The Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 8, 2010. Retrieved July 4, 2010. "New Music Featuring Justin Bieber!". Seventeen. May 25, 2010. Archived from the original on July 11, 2019. Retrieved October 18, 2018. "Bieber the king of the Internet". Toronto Sun. July 7, 2010. Archived from the original on September 10, 2017. Retrieved July 16, 2010. "Bieber's 'Baby' YouTube's most-watched video". Today. July 16, 2010. Archived from the original on July 2, 2017. Retrieved March 30, 2011. Kosner, Anthony Wing (November 24, 2012). "PSY's Gangnam Style Tops Bieber's Baby To Become Most Viewed YouTube Video Ever". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 23, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2014. "Justin Bieber Accounts for 3 Percent of All Twitter Traffic". TVGuide. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2010. Vena, Jocelyn (November 28, 2011). "Justin Bieber Graduates To 'Adult Game' On New Album". MTV. Archived from the original on September 19, 2018. Retrieved November 29, 2011. "Justin Bieber's Voice Breaking". Contact music. April 27, 2010. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved October 31, 2010. Paskin, Willa (February 18, 2011). "Justin Bieber Got Shot and Killed on CSI Last Night". Vulture. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2014. Vena, Jocelyn (September 13, 2010). "Justin Bieber's Triple-Threat VMA Performance: Making The Show". MTV. Archived from the original on September 19, 2018. Retrieved September 14, 2010. Ziegbe, Mawuse (October 24, 2010). "Justin Bieber Announces Acoustic Album Release Date". MTV. Archived from the original on September 19, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2010. "How Will Justin Bieber's My Worlds Acoustic Rank Against Great Unplugged Albums?". MTV. November 10, 2010. Archived from the original on May 26, 2012. Retrieved November 14, 2010. Stransky, Tanner (October 12, 2010). "Justin Bieber's 'First Step 2 Forever: My Story': We read it so you don't have to!". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 3, 2023. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Justin Bieber: Never Say Never Archived November 16, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Box Office Mojo. Retrieved February 12, 2011. Ellwood, Gregory (February 12, 2011). "Box Office: 'Never Say Never' as Justin Bieber beats Adam Sandler Friday for no. 1". Hit Fix. Archived from the original on August 23, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2011. "'Just', 'Justin', 'Juliet' Jumpin'". Box Office Mojo. February 14, 2011. Archived from the original on February 16, 2011. Retrieved February 14, 2011. "Justin Bieber: Never Say Never (2011)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 14, 2019. Retrieved August 16, 2012. "Highest-grossing concert or performance film at the global box office". Guinness World Records. January 11, 2018. Archived from the original on March 28, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023. Dinh, James (January 31, 2011). "Justin Bieber's Never Say Never – The Remixes Due Valentine's Day". MTV News (Viacom). Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2011. Schuhmann, John (February 18, 2011). "MVP Bieber shows off his pro-style game in defeat". NBA/Turner Sports Interactive, Inc. Archived from the original on March 3, 2015. Retrieved February 18, 2011. "Justin Bieber, Bruno Mars, Chris Colfer Make Time's 100 Most Influential List". MTV. London, United Kingdom. April 21, 2011. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved October 23, 2018. Pomerantz, Dorothy. "Full List: The Best-Paid Celebrities Under 30". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 26, 2012. Retrieved June 13, 2011. "Justin Bieber: Is the singer releasing an album for Christmas? - CBBC Newsround". Archived from the original on November 26, 2021. Retrieved November 26, 2021. "Greatest of All Time Top Holiday Albums". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved November 19, 2021. Trust, Gary. "Justin Bieber Hangs 'Mistletoe' Atop Holiday Songs Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 19, 2018. Retrieved October 19, 2018. "Mariah Carey and Justin Bieber team up for new version of 'All I Want For Christmas Is You'". NME. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2018. "Greatest of All Time Holiday 100 Songs". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved November 19, 2021. Jenkins, Craig (March 24, 2021). "Justin Bieber's New Album Is Mostly Peace, No Justice (Phew)". Vulture. Archived from the original on April 2, 2021. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Vena, Jocelyn (March 1, 2012). "Justin Bieber Announces New Single, 'Boyfriend'". MTV. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2012. Trust, Gary (April 4, 2012). "Justin Bieber's 'Boyfriend' Debuts at No. 2 on Hot 100". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on March 3, 2013. Retrieved April 4, 2012. Werde, Bill (April 4, 2012). "Editor's Note: What Role Did Bundling and Exclusives Play in Madonna and Justin Bieber's Big Debuts?". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Retrieved April 4, 2012. Reporter, Metro Web (February 24, 2012). "Justin Bieber and Far East Movement collaborate on Live My Life". Metro. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Retrieved October 18, 2018. Deen, Sarah (May 29, 2012). "Justin Bieber's new single Die In Your Arms released online". Metro. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved January 10, 2019. Macatee, Rebecca (June 5, 2012). "First Listen! Justin Bieber Joined by Ludacris for "All Around the World" Single". E! News. E!News. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved January 10, 2019. "Justin Bieber To Release 'As Long as You Love Me' as Second 'Believe' Single". Capital. London, United Kingdom. June 27, 2012. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2019. "Justin Bieber Biography & Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2010. Anderson, Kyle (June 13, 2012). "Believe (2012)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 19, 2012. Retrieved June 17, 2012. Dolan, Jon (June 15, 2012). "Believe". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 11, 2012. Retrieved June 17, 2012. "Mumford & sons' 'Babel' fastest seller of 2012". The Guardian. London, United Kingdom. October 3, 2012. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved January 29, 2017. "Mumford & sons' 'Babel' scores biggest debut". Billboard.com. Archived from the original on September 5, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2015. Caulfield, Keith (June 26, 2012). "Official: Justin Bieber's 'Believe' Is Year's Biggest Debut, Bows at No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved June 27, 2012. Dowling, Marianne (June 27, 2012). "Bieber's 'Believe' debuts at Nº 1". Jam! CANOE. Archived from the original on December 6, 2012. Retrieved June 27, 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "'Beautiful': Carly Rae Jepsen & Justin Bieber's Song Mirrors One Direction's Hit (AUDIO)". HuffPost. London, United Kingdom. September 5, 2012. Archived from the original on October 20, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2018. "Justin Bieber's 'Beauty And A Beat' Video Confirms "Personal Footage" Theft Was A Hoax". Capital. London, United Kingdom. October 12, 2012. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2019. "NBC Presents 'Justin Bieber: All Around the World' Thursday, June 21". TV By the Numbers. May 30, 2012. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved May 30, 2012. Kaufman, Gil (December 14, 2012). "Justin Bieber Confirms January 29 Release For Believe Acoustic EP". MTV. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved December 15, 2012. "Justin Bieber hosts 'SNL': What's the verdict?" Archived June 26, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. CNN Entertainment. February 11, 2013. Ryan, Mike (February 10, 2013). "'SNL' Scorecard: Justin Bieber's Show Was All About Justin Bieber" Archived September 19, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. The Huffington Post. Tewari, Nidhi (August 26, 2014). "". International Business Times. Gicas, Peter (May 23, 2013). "Bill Hader Compares Saturday Night Live Hosts: Disses Justin Bieber, Calls Justin Timberlake a 'Class Act'" Archived June 26, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. E! Online. "BIEBER RECOVERING AFTER FAINTING AT LONDON CONCERT". Associated Press. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved March 8, 2013. "JUSTIN BIEBER CANCELS Concert in Portugal". TMZ. Archived from the original on October 19, 2018. Retrieved March 12, 2013. Slight, Lucy (August 19, 2013). "Justin Bieber and Michael Jackson track 'Slave 2 the Rhythm' leaks online". MTV. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2013. "Justin Bieber, Michael Jackson Duet: Estate Releases Statement". inquisitr.com. August 20, 2013. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved May 21, 2014. "Justin Bieber, Miley Cyrus 'Twerk' Lil Twist Track Leaks". MTV. August 29, 2013. Archived from the original on October 19, 2018. Retrieved August 30, 2013. "Has Justin Bieber Gone Too Far in New Song "Lolly"? Listen Here!". In Touch Weekly. InTouch. February 5, 2014. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2018. "Even Justin Bieber's Impressed By Madison Beer's 'Melodies' Video!". MTV. September 13, 2013. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Kaufman, Gil (February 8, 2013). "Justin Bieber 'Believe' Movie To Hit Theaters". MTV. Archived from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved July 6, 2013. Kaufman, Gil (October 3, 2013). "Justin Bieber Starts Countdown To 'Heartbreaker' – Music, Celebrity, Artist News". MTV. Archived from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved November 4, 2013. "Justin Bieber Teases New Song 'All That Matters'". MTV UK. October 11, 2013. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved November 4, 2013. "Justin Bieber Delays 'Journals'". Rap-Up. December 13, 2013. Archived from the original on September 26, 2018. Retrieved March 26, 2014. McGahan, Michelle (November 11, 2014). "Justin Bieber and Cody Simpson's 'Home to Mama' Will Make You Swoon [LISTEN]". popcrush.com. Popcrush. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2015. Pomerantz, Dorothy. "Justin Bieber Tops Forbes' List Of The Highest-Earning Celebrities Under 30". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 24, 2019. Retrieved October 23, 2018. Sisario, Ben (April 1, 2014). "Universal Music Group Breaks Up Its Island Def Jam Division". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 23, 2018. Retrieved September 1, 2015. "Artists Archive". Def Jam. April 17, 2014. Archived from the original on January 3, 2019. Retrieved November 13, 2015. Warwick, Charlotte. "Justin Bieber releases AMAZING remix of old song 'Where Are You Now' featuring Skrillex and Diplo". sugarscape.com. Sugarscape. Archived from the original on December 9, 2016. Retrieved June 10, 2015. "Justin Bieber - Chart History (Hot Dance/Electronic Songs)". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 28, 2021. Retrieved December 2, 2021. "Justin Bieber Takes Grammy Stage by Storm with Performances of 'Love Yourself' and 'Where Are Ü Now'". People. February 15, 2016. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Lee, Ashley (March 6, 2015). "Watch Tom Hanks, Justin Bieber Dance in Carly Rae Jepsen's 'I Really Like You' Video". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 8, 2015. Retrieved March 6, 2015. Bonner, Mehera (March 31, 2015). "Justin Bieber Roast on Comedy Central: Funniest Jokes About the "King Joffrey" of Pop, Martha Stewart, and More!". Us magazine. Archived from the original on July 19, 2019. Retrieved August 30, 2015. "Justin Bieber Surprises Deserving Fans in 'Knock Knock Live' Preview: Watch". Billboard. July 28, 2015. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Lipshutz, Jason (August 28, 2015). "Justin Bieber Finds The Answer on 'What Do You Mean?': Track Review". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Trust, Gary. "Justin Bieber Scores First Hot 100 No. 1 With Debut of 'What Do You Mean?'". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2021. "Youngest male solo artist to debut at No.1 on Billboard Hot 100". Guinness World Records. September 19, 2015. Archived from the original on July 21, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Shontell, Alyson. "Justin Bieber explains why he broke down in tears at the VMAs". Business Insider. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. "Justin Bieber's 'Sorry' Dethrones Adele's 'Hello' Atop Hot 100". Billboard. January 11, 2016. Archived from the original on January 12, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2021. "Justin Bieber Now Lands His Third No. 1; Rihanna Work-Work-Works It Into the Top 10". Vulture. February 1, 2016. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Zellner, Xander (February 20, 2019). "Ariana Grande, The Beatles & Every Act to Chart 3 Songs in the Hot 100 Top 5 Simultaneously". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Caulfield, Keith (August 12, 2016). "The Year in Charts 2016: Adele Rules as Top Artist (Again!), Justin Bieber Leads Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved September 23, 2021. Trust, Gary (February 25, 2016). "The Next Justin Bieber Single From 'Purpose' Is …". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. "Justin Bieber's First Four Releases Coming On Vinyl In February 2016, Including 'Journals' | Idolator". Idolator.com. December 23, 2015. Archived from the original on July 19, 2019. Retrieved February 17, 2016. "Justin Bieber Scores Sixth No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Purpose'". Billboard. November 22, 2015. Archived from the original on May 20, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2016. "Justin Bieber Finds The Answer on 'What Do You Mean?': Track Review". Billboard. August 28, 2015. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved October 16, 2015. "Global Music Report" (PDF). International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. April 12, 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 30, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Mackinley, Page (June 9, 2016). "Justin Bieber's Company Video Offers Blond Hair Porn, Tour Life, Emotions and More". INQUISITR. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved July 24, 2016. "Justin Bieber Details Massive North American 'Purpose' Tour". Rolling Stone. November 11, 2015. Archived from the original on October 10, 2017. Retrieved November 11, 2015. Sexton, Paul (January 8, 2016). "Justin Bieber Is First Artist to Occupy Top 3 Slots on U.K. Singles Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. "Major Lazer, Justin Bieber & MO's 'Cold Water' Splashes in at No. 2 on Hot 100 as Sia Stays Up Top". Billboard. August 1, 2016. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. "Listen to Justin Bieber & DJ Snake's 'Let Me Love You' Collab". Billboard. August 5, 2016. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved December 26, 2016. Getz, Dana. "Justin Bieber, Post Malone: Deja Vu released". Entertainment. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved October 18, 2018. "Justin Bieber Gets Real About Fan Encounters In New Documentary Trailer". MTV News. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved January 5, 2017. "Grammy Awards 2017: See the Full Winners List". Billboard. February 12, 2017. Archived from the original on February 2, 2018. Retrieved November 21, 2021. "Jingle Ball 2016: Justin Bieber, Ariana Grande & More Celebrate the Season, Hailee Steinfeld Gets a Birthday Surprise Backstage". Billboard. December 10, 2016. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2021. "Justin Bieber highlights from the NHL Celebrity Shootout". Sportsnet.ca. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 1, 2017. "Luis Fonsi & Daddy Yankee Drop 'Despacito' Remix Featuring Justin Bieber: Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved April 30, 2017. "Justin Bieber Remix Boosts Luis Fonsi & Daddy Yankee's 'Despacito' to Hot 100's Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved April 30, 2017. "Genius Top Songs". Genius. Archived from the original on January 8, 2018. Retrieved September 4, 2021. "Justin Bieber Wins First Latin GRAMMY For "Despacito" Remix". Grammy. Archived from the original on November 10, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2021. "Justin Bieber - Chart History (Greatest of All Time Hot Latin Songs)". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 28, 2021. Retrieved December 2, 2021. "Justin Bieber - Chart History (Greatest of All Time Songs of the Summer)". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 28, 2021. Retrieved December 2, 2021. "DJ Khaled – Chart history | Billboard". www.billboard.com. Archived from the original on May 15, 2019. Retrieved May 10, 2017. Trust, Gary (May 15, 2017). "Luis Fonsi & Daddy Yankee's 'Despacito,' Featuring Justin Bieber, Hits No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved May 16, 2017. "Justin Bieber - Chart History (Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs)". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 2, 2021. Retrieved December 2, 2021. "We Spoke To David Guetta About '2U', Justin Bieber & Victoria's Secret | MTV UK". Archived from the original on July 28, 2019. Retrieved June 8, 2017. "David Guetta & Justin Bieber Reveal The Cover Of "2U"". idolator. June 7, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2017. "Victoria's Secret Model Sara Sampaio Teases Justin Bieber & David Guetta's '2U': Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2017. "Justin Bieber cancels final tour dates". CNN. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved July 24, 2017. Chiu, Melody (July 24, 2017). "'Super Exhausted': Why Justin Bieber Canceled His Purpose World Tour". People. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved July 25, 2017. "2016 Year End Top 100 Worldwide Tours" (PDF). pollstar.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 13, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2021. "2017 Year End Top 20 Worldwide Tours" (PDF). pollstar.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 1, 2018. Retrieved November 21, 2021. McDermott, Page (August 18, 2017). "Justin Bieber's 'Friends' is his best song in ages". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved August 18, 2017. Atkinson, Katie (January 28, 2018). "Grammys 2018 Winners: The Complete List". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved November 21, 2021. Lockett, Dee (January 26, 2018). "Justin Bieber Will Spare Us His Bad Spanish by Reportedly Skipping the Grammys". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved January 29, 2018. Penrose, Nerisha (February 15, 2018). "Justin Bieber & Quavo Join 2018 NBA All-Star Celebrity Game Lineup". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023. "Justin Bieber - Chart History (Hot R&B Songs)". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 28, 2021. Retrieved December 2, 2021. "DJ Khaled Drops 'No Brainer' Video Featuring Justin Bieber, Quavo, Chance the Rapper". Variety. July 27, 2018. Archived from the original on July 18, 2019. Retrieved August 17, 2018. Kaufman, Gil (April 22, 2019). "Justin Bieber Thanks Ariana Grande For Sharing Coachella Stage: 'That Felt Right'". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved January 5, 2022. Morin, Alyssa (May 3, 2019). "Why Fans Think Justin Bieber and Ed Sheeran Are Collaborating on New Music". E! Online. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved May 6, 2019. Strauss, Matthew (July 11, 2019). "Justin Bieber Joins Billie Eilish on New "bad guy" Remix: Listen". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on July 12, 2019. Retrieved July 12, 2019. Zemler, Emily (October 4, 2019). "Hear Justin Bieber Team Up With Dan + Shay for '10,000 Hours'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 7, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2021. "Dan + Shay - Chart History (Hot 100)". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 2, 2021. Retrieved December 2, 2021. "It's Dan + Shay & Justin Bieber's Time Atop Hot Country Songs: '10,000 Hours' Hits No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 1, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Trust, Gary (October 14, 2019). "Justin Bieber Banks 200th Total Week in Hot 100's Top 10 — The Youngest Solo Male to Reach Milestone". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved January 5, 2022. "Justin Bieber Announces New Album, Tour, Docuseries and Single "Yummy"". Complex. Archived from the original on December 24, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2020. "Justin Bieber". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 25, 2019. Retrieved March 13, 2020. "Justin Bieber announces first new album in five years". The Guardian. December 24, 2019. Archived from the original on December 27, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2020 – via www.theguardian.com. Spangler, Todd (February 5, 2020). "Justin Bieber's 'Seasons' Docuseries Sets YouTube Originals Viewing Record". Variety. Archived from the original on April 7, 2023. Retrieved August 2, 2020. Kiefer, Halle (January 28, 2020). "Justin Bieber Announces New Album Will Drop Valentine's Day". Vulture.com. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved March 13, 2020. "Justin Bieber Announces 'Changes' Album, Shares 'Get Me' With Kehlani: Stream It Now | Billboard". Billboard. January 28, 2020. Archived from the original on January 28, 2020. "Justin Bieber & Quavo Team up For Powerful Music Video 'Intentions': Watch". Billboard. February 7, 2020. Archived from the original on November 12, 2021. Retrieved March 13, 2020. "Justin Bieber Earns Seventh No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Changes'". Billboard. February 23, 2020. Archived from the original on March 11, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. "Ariana Grande & Justin Bieber's First Collab 'Stuck With U' Is Dropping & Here's Everything We Know About The Song". Capital FM. May 4, 2020. Archived from the original on February 7, 2023. Retrieved May 8, 2020. "Justin Bieber Comes to the Rescue In DJ Khaled's 'Popstar' Featuring Drake: Watch". Billboard. September 4, 2020. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved March 31, 2022. Spary, Sara (September 18, 2020). "Justin Bieber and Chance the Rapper get 'Holy' in a star-studded new video". CNN. Archived from the original on March 19, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2020. Spangler, Todd (October 15, 2020). "Snapchat Now Lets You Add Songs to Posts, Launches With Preview of New Justin Bieber, Benny Blanco Track". Variety. Archived from the original on March 19, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2020. Aniftos, Rania (November 6, 2020). "Justin Bieber & J Balvin Add a New 'Mood' to 24kGoldn & Iann Dior's Official Remix". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved November 15, 2020. Aniftos, Rania (November 20, 2020). "Shawn Mendes & Justin Bieber Face the 'Monster' Inside In Powerful New Single". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Kiefer, Halle (January 1, 2021). "Justin Bieber Enters 2021 By Entering the Ring In His New Year's New 'Anyone' Video". Vulture. Archived from the original on January 1, 2021. Retrieved January 1, 2021. Paul, Larisha (February 18, 2021). "Justin Bieber's Valentine's Day 'Journals' Performance Breaks TikTok Records". uDiscoverMusic. Archived from the original on May 21, 2022. Retrieved April 17, 2022. "Justin Bieber Announces 'Justice' Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 26, 2021. Retrieved April 5, 2021. "Justin Bieber Hops on Motorcycle to Tease 'Hold On' Single". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2021. Peters, Mitchell (March 21, 2021). "Fans Choose Justin Bieber's 'Justice' Album as This Week's Favorite New Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021. Retrieved March 23, 2021. Rice, Nicholas (March 19, 2021). "Justin Bieber Drops New Album Justice and Accompanying Music Video for Latest Single 'Peaches'". People. Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved March 19, 2021. McIntyre, Hugh (March 30, 2021). "Justin Bieber Invades The Hot 100 With Songs From His New Album 'Justice'". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 18, 2021. Retrieved March 30, 2021. Caulfield, Keith (March 28, 2021). "Justin Bieber Scores Eighth No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Justice'". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 28, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2021. Trust, Gary (March 30, 2021). "Justin Bieber Debuts at No. 1 on Hot 100 With 'Peaches,' Becomes 1st Solo Male to Open Atop Hot 100 & Billboard 200 in Same Week". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 29, 2021. Retrieved March 30, 2021. McCarthy, Tyler (April 5, 2021). "Justin Bieber drops surprise gospel EP on Easter Sunday titled 'Freedom'". Fox News. Archived from the original on April 5, 2021. Retrieved April 5, 2021. McIntyre, Hugh (April 11, 2021). "Justin Bieber Returns To No. 1 On The Albums Chart, Beating Demi Lovato By A Tiny Sum". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 12, 2021. Retrieved April 12, 2021. "The Kid LAROI & Justin Bieber's 'Stay' Hits No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. August 9, 2021. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. "Justin Bieber Becomes Youngest Soloist Ever to Reach 100 Billboard Hot 100 Hits, As 'Stay' Debuts". Billboard. July 20, 2021. Archived from the original on October 3, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2021. Kim, U. (September 5, 2021). "The Kid LAROI And Justin Bieber's "STAY" Achieves Perfect All-Kill On Korean Charts". Soompi. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. Mier, Tomás (November 29, 2022). "Most of Apple Music's Top 10 Songs of 2022 Weren't Even Released This Year". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved December 2, 2022. Kaufman, Gil. "Justin Bieber, Chance the Rapper & Jaden Smith to Headline 'Freedom Experience' at SoFi Stadium". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 29, 2023. Retrieved December 14, 2021. Trust, Gary. "Lil Nas X & Jack Harlow's 'Industry Baby' Hits No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 18, 2021. Retrieved October 19, 2021. Mike, Steven (August 13, 2021). "WizKid Essence (Remix) feat. Justin Bieber". ivoryMP3. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Legaspi, Althea (August 20, 2021). "Skrillex, Justin Bieber, Don Toliver Link Up on New Song 'Don't Go'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 24, 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021. Bowenbank, Starr. "Justin Bieber Takes Fans Behind the Scenes of His 2020 New Year's Eve Concert in 'Our World' Trailer". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved April 17, 2022. Major, Michael. "Justin Bieber Releases 'Rockin Around the Christmas Tree' Cover". broadwayworld. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved November 21, 2021. Abbott, Harrison (November 16, 2021). "Justin Bieber World Justice Tour: 2022/23 Dates, Venues & How to Buy Tickets". Newsweek. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved November 21, 2021. Kaufman, Gil (November 19, 2021). "Justin Bieber, Poo Bear Join Bryson Tiller For a Very 'Lonely Christmas'". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 19, 2021. Retrieved November 19, 2021. "Justin Bieber Goes Ahead With Saudi Arabia Concert After Calls to Boycott". Billboard. December 6, 2021. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2021. Freiman, Jordan (April 4, 2022). "Grammys 2022: Complete list of nominees and winners". CBS News. Archived from the original on April 4, 2022. Retrieved April 5, 2022. "Justin Bieber's Spotify peak". Spotify. Archived from the original on December 22, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2022. Stewart, Jamila. "Everyone Was at h.wood Group and Revolve's Homecoming Weekend Parties". Vogue. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Mamo, Heran. "Omah Lay Talks Reuniting With Justin Bieber and Bringing More 'Attention' to Afrobeats Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Trust, Gary. "Glass Animals' 'Heat Waves' Tops Hot 100 For Fourth Week, Doja Cat's 'Woman' Hits Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 29, 2022. Retrieved March 29, 2022. Trust, Gary (February 21, 2022). "Justin Bieber Makes History as 'Ghost' Hits No. 1 on Pop Airplay Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 21, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2022. Daw, Stephen. "Kehlani Keeps Justin Bieber 'Up At Night' on Bouncy New Collab: Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved March 31, 2022. "Justin Bieber Joins Daniel Caesar for 'Peaches' at Coachella". Variety. April 16, 2022. Archived from the original on October 18, 2022. Retrieved April 17, 2022. Legaspi, Althea. "Justin Bieber, Don Toliver Take to the Slopes for a Snowy Adventure in 'Honest'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. "Justin Bieber Heads to 'Free Fire' for an In-Game Performance". HYPEBEAST. August 31, 2022. Archived from the original on September 1, 2022. Retrieved September 1, 2022. "Justin Bieber sells entire music back catalogue to Hipgnosis - National | Globalnews.ca". Global News. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved January 25, 2023. Chelosky, Danielle (January 12, 2023). "Justin Bieber Reportedly Said No to Playing Coachella in 2023 But for a Good Reason". Uproxx. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023. Centeno, Tony (February 25, 2023). "Don Toliver Taps Future, Justin Bieber, WizKid & More For 'Love Sick' Album". iHeart.com. Archived from the original on February 25, 2023. Retrieved February 25, 2023. Kaufman, Gil. "Justin Bieber Drops Into Don Toliver's Rolling Loud Set Just Days After Canceling Justice World Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 9, 2023. Retrieved March 9, 2023. Moore, Julia (September 15, 2023). "Justin Bieber Shares BTS from 'Snooze (Acoustic)' Duet with SZA as Hailey Says He 'Always' Gives 'Vocals'". People. Archived from the original on September 18, 2023. Retrieved September 29, 2023. Moniuszko, Sara M. (May 4, 2019). "Justin Bieber draws heat for defending Chris Brown, calling past assault charge a 'mistake'". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2021. "Justin Bieber on his musical inspirations, his fans, and trying to be a regular kid". Vanity Fair. January 4, 2011. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved March 10, 2014. "Justin Bieber Music Influences". MTV. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved March 26, 2014. "Justin Bieber". Interview Magazine. July 13, 2015. Archived from the original on March 18, 2016. Retrieved November 13, 2015. "happy birthday @kanyewest. Your art has moved me in ways noone [sic] elses has. Your taste and style has helped shape the artist I am today". Instagram. June 8, 2022. Archived from the original on October 6, 2022. Retrieved June 17, 2022. "Justin Bieber on His Musical Inspirations, His Fans, and Trying to Be a Regular Kid". Vanity Fair. January 4, 2011. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Justin Bieber's Next Album Inspired By Justin Timberlake". MTV. October 19, 2011. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Kellman, Andy. "Biography: Justin Bieber". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 5, 2021. Retrieved October 13, 2021. "The Kid Laroi on the 'Funny' Moment He Got a Call From Justin Bieber While in the Shower". Popcrush. April 2, 2021. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Gracie, Bianca (February 13, 2020). "How Justin Bieber's 'Journals' Laid the Foundation For His Turn to R&B". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. Retrieved May 12, 2023. Rosen, Jody (March 22, 2010). "My World 2.0 : Justin Bieber : Review". Rolling Stone. Album Reviews. Archived from the original on March 25, 2010. Retrieved June 25, 2016. Williams, Phoebe (July 19, 2012). "Teen stars in 2012". Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved April 30, 2020. Canadian singer remains the king of teen pop, with a devoted fan base "Justin Bieber: 'I don't want to sing about sex, drugs and swearing'". NME. January 10, 2012. Archived from the original on October 18, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2018. Gicas, Peter (November 18, 2013). "Justin Bieber Releases Sexed-Up New Song "PYD" Featuring R. Kelly—Listen Now". E! Online. Archived from the original on February 15, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2018. "Justin Bieber is Teaming Up with EDM's Biggest Trio for New Collab". EDM.com. May 31, 2016. Archived from the original on January 13, 2017. Retrieved January 11, 2017. Golden, Zara (November 11, 2015). "How Justin Bieber Grew Into Himself, According To Poo Bear". Fader. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2021. "Justin Bieber and Other Famous Boy Sopranos". Itchy Fish. August 17, 2010. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved June 14, 2018. "Justin Bieber faces the biggest threat to his career: puberty". The Guardian. February 11, 2011. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved June 25, 2016. "The Truth About Bieber". Jan Smith Studios. March 1, 2015. Archived from the original on December 1, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2018. "It's a Tenor's World: How to Survive as a Baritone Singing Pop". TakeLessons.com Blog. June 16, 2015. Archived from the original on September 13, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2018. "Vocalist Research and Discussion/Justin Bieber". The Range Place (forum). Archived from the original on October 20, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018. McCormick, Neil (November 9, 2015). "Justin Bieber and One Direction's new albums: 'biting the hand that feeds them'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on November 13, 2015. Retrieved November 14, 2015. Sullivan, Caroline (November 12, 2015). "Justin Bieber: Purpose review – a look back and a fresh start". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 14, 2015. Retrieved November 14, 2015. Bell, Chris (June 10, 2019). "Justin Bieber challenges Tom Cruise to UFC fight". BBC News. Archived from the original on December 3, 2019. Retrieved June 10, 2019. Kilkenny, Carmel (May 16, 2016). "Justin Bieber live in Canadian homecoming". Radio Canada International. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2016. "Justin Bieber awarded Diamond Jubilee Medal by Stephen Harper". CTV news. November 23, 2012. Archived from the original on December 13, 2012. Retrieved December 7, 2012. "Justin Bieber's 'Baby' With New Streaming Data Beats Out Elton John For RIAA's Top Platinum Single of All Time". Billboard. May 17, 2013. Archived from the original on May 20, 2013. Retrieved September 2, 2013. Warner, Denise (August 1, 2013). "Justin Bieber's 'Baby' the best-selling digital song ever". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved September 2, 2013. "GRAMMY Award Results for Justin Bieber". GRAMMY.com. November 16, 2022. Archived from the original on April 19, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2022. "Justin Bieber Wins His First-Ever Latin Grammy". Billboard. November 17, 2017. Archived from the original on June 22, 2021. Retrieved November 17, 2017. "Justin Bieber - The JUNO Awards". The JUNO Awards. April 14, 2022. Archived from the original on November 8, 2021. Retrieved April 14, 2022. "Brit Awards 2011: Justin Bieber wins International Breakthrough Act". STV Entertainment. February 15, 2011. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved September 3, 2011. "NOMINEES". Archived from the original on February 7, 2016. Retrieved February 16, 2016. "Justin Bieber Wins Social Artist Billboard Award, Tops 13 Total Career Nods". May 19, 2015. Archived from the original on September 10, 2017. Retrieved September 14, 2016. "Justin Bieber: His American Music Awards History". Billboard. November 22, 2015. Archived from the original on September 10, 2017. Retrieved September 14, 2016. Teen Choice Awards: "Teen Choice Awards 2010: First Round Of Nominees Announced". MTV Networks. June 14, 2010. Archived from the original on June 6, 2012. Retrieved August 31, 2011. "Teen Choice Awards 2010: Second (Giant) Wave Of Nominees Announced!". MTV Networks. June 28, 2010. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved August 31, 2011. "2010 Teen Choice Awards winners announced". Entertainment Weekly. August 9, 2010. Archived from the original on May 23, 2013. Retrieved August 31, 2011. "Teen Choice Awards Nominations Announced: It's a Harry Potter vs. Twilight Showdown!". E! Online. June 29, 2011. Archived from the original on December 8, 2011. Retrieved August 31, 2011. "Teen Choice Awards 2011 winners". Los Angeles Times. August 7, 2011. Archived from the original on January 14, 2016. Retrieved August 31, 2011. Geier, Thom (July 31, 2016). "Teen Choice Awards 2016: The Complete Winners List". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 4, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Vulpo, Mike (August 14, 2017). "Teen Choice Awards 2017 Winners: The Complete List". Eonline. Archived from the original on October 2, 2018. Retrieved November 24, 2021. FLYNN, CAITLIN (October 25, 2015). "How Many MTV EMAs Did Justin Bieber Win? He Was The Night's Biggest Winner & Twitter Has A Lot Of Feelings About It". Bustle. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved September 14, 2016. Lipshutz, Jason (May 20, 2013). "Justin Bieber Booed at Billboard Music Awards: Understanding The Backlash". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. Billboard Staff (April 3, 2013). "Justin Bieber, Taylor Swift, Bruno Mars and Miguel to Perform at Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Gold & Platinum - RIAA". RIAA. Archived from the original on November 11, 2022. Retrieved May 6, 2023. "Justin Bieber Is The First Artist To Have 15 Songs Surpass 1 Billion Streams On Spotify". World Music Views. December 13, 2023. Archived from the original on December 13, 2023. Retrieved December 13, 2023. Geffen, Sasha (December 5, 2015). "How Many Records Can Adele and Justin Bieber break?". MTV. MTV News. Archived from the original on July 17, 2022. Retrieved September 14, 2016. Stephenson, Kristen (August 29, 2016). "Justin Bieber scores eight titles in Guinness World Records 2017 Edition". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved September 14, 2016. "Decade-End Charts Social 50 (2010s)". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 25, 2021. Retrieved November 25, 2021. "The Greatest Pop Star By Year: 1981 - 2020 (Staff Picks)". Billboard. March 28, 2021. Archived from the original on December 19, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2021. "Year-End Charts Top Artists - Male (2016)". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 25, 2021. Retrieved November 25, 2021. "Decade-End Charts Top Artists (2010s)". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved November 25, 2021. "Greatest of All Time Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 28, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2021. "Greatest of All Time Hot 100 Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 2, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2021. "The '90s Canadian Invasion". OZY. December 9, 2013. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. MTV News Staff. "10 Years Of Justin Bieber: Fans Reflect On How Beliebing Changed Their Lives". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "The Prince Of Pop". Billboard. June 8, 2012. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved April 30, 2020. Archive-Mawuse-Ziegbe. "Justin Bieber Wins Best New Artist VMA". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2022. "Justin Bieber's big VMAs win has left fans with mixed reactions". The Independent. September 13, 2021. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2022. "How Social Media Broke and Birthed the Biggest Pop Star of Our Age: Justin Bieber". My Site. October 6, 2021. Archived from the original on January 16, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. Choe, Brandon (August 7, 2020). "'Justin Bieber: Seasons': Pop Icon Fought To Stay Alive And Married – Paleyfest LA". Deadline. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Justin Bieber Links With Don Toliver On 'Honest'". Clash Magazine. April 29, 2022. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. Goldberg, Stephanie (March 28, 2013). "Justin Bieber: From tween sensation to adult icon". CNN. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Bieber the icon, and photographers clicking to win – the week in art". the Guardian. June 25, 2021. Archived from the original on November 28, 2021. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Face-off: Biggest cultural icon: Bieber or Zuckerburg?". Orlando Sentinel. May 16, 2011. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. Ramsay, Derek (September 26, 2017). "Justin Bieber". Variety. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. Fazakerley, Tom (January 17, 2013). "How Justin Bieber revolutionised careers in the music industry". the Guardian. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Justin Bieber's rise to fame from penniless beginnings to superstardom". Capital. September 8, 2020. Archived from the original on May 11, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Justin Bieber fever hits Liverpool". the Guardian. March 11, 2011. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Bieber fever in Spain as The Bieb trains with Barcelona". CP24. April 7, 2011. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Bieber fever hits Paris as idol sings from balcony". The Irish Times. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Billie Eilish Almost Went to Therapy Over Her Justin Bieber Obsession". Vanity Fair. July 8, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Is Justin Bieber Losing It?". HuffPost UK. March 7, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Stars rock with locks: Justin Bieber is the latest hottie to set a hair trend". The Denver Post. August 5, 2010. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "The Kid Just Has It". Vanity Fair. May 5, 2011. Retrieved May 2, 2022. "Justin Bieber Reveals Will Smith Counsels Him Weekly in Rare, Raw Interview". The Hollywood Reporter. November 20, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2015. Montano, Ed; Shill, Gene (March 5, 2017). "Pop with purpose: in defence of Justin Bieber". The Conversation. Retrieved May 1, 2022. McIntyre, Hugh. "Justin Bieber Is No Longer Just A Pop Star, He's Proven He Can Do Anything". Forbes. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Shawn Mendes talks moving on from Justin Bieber influence". Pressparty. Retrieved May 2, 2022. "Pop Quintet Why Don't We Explain Why They're Not Just Another Boy Band & How Justin Bieber Inspired Them". Billboard. July 10, 2017. Retrieved November 14, 2020. "Justin Bieber FOLLOWS Johnny Orlando On Twitter After Mentioning Tour". Exclusive Hollywood. December 29, 2019. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Roth, Madeline. "Never Forget That Six Years Ago, Katy Perry Decided Niall Horan's Fate On The X Factor". MTV News. Retrieved May 7, 2020. "How Dua Lipa went from aspiring singer to one of today's top global female pop stars". ABC News. Retrieved May 6, 2020. I thought that was the easiest thing I could reach out to—social media and YouTube. It never had that kind of Justin Bieber effect I was hoping for," Lipa said. "But it created a formal portfolio for me, and then I started getting some messages from producers and people being like, 'Hey if you want to come and use the studio you can come and just write.' And that's how I started. Savage, Mark (April 2, 2020). "How Dua Lipa released an album from isolation". BBC News. Retrieved May 6, 2020. Deep down I wanted to have that Justin Bieber effect where someone would find me on YouTube! : "Charlie Puth on Instagram: "I don't usually do this but here we go. #Changes by Justin Bieber is out now. I had nothing to do with this album, but I genuinely am a..."". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2020. In fact, his viral leap into superstardom as a result of YouTube is what inspired me to achieve the same Kaufman, Amy (April 13, 2010). "Adults work hard to manage Justin Bieber's image". Azcentral. Archived from the original on June 17, 2010. Retrieved October 31, 2010. Rizzo, Monica (January 3, 2013). "Justin Bieber: Teenage heartthrob calls for tough rules after paparazzo's death". The Washington Times. Retrieved May 9, 2014. Collins, Nick (July 6, 2010). "Why is Justin Bieber so loved and hated?". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2010. "Justin Bieber Graces Cover Of Love's 'Androgyny Issue'". MTV. "4Chan Starts #Jail4Bieber Hoax, Accuses Justin Bieber Of Sexually Assaulting Minor". IB Times. March 15, 2013. Retrieved March 16, 2013. "Justin Bieber wasn't spitting on fans, says rep". Digital Spy. August 1, 2013. Retrieved April 15, 2023. Hoffman, Claire (March 13, 2014). "Justin Bieber: Bad Boy". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Justin Bieber changes his name to 'Bizzle', UK rapper Lethal". The Independent. February 11, 2014. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Justin Bieber's Performance Style Is Better Than Ever". Vogue. March 23, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Justin Bieber's Purpose Tour Style Has Hit Next-Level Status". GQ. March 10, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Justin Bieber 'is a changed man'". Santa Maria Times. February 14, 2020. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved April 3, 2020. Van Houten, Mariella (February 9, 2019). "Justin Bieber Is a Completely Different Person From What You Remember". Showbiz Cheatsheet. Retrieved March 31, 2020. Haskell, Rob (February 7, 2019). "Justin and Hailey Bieber Open Up About Their Passionate, Not-Always-Easy but Absolutely All-In Romance". Vogue. Retrieved March 31, 2020. Vena, Jocelyn (March 15, 2011). "Justin Bieber Wax Figures Unveiled". MTV. Retrieved April 8, 2011. Friend, David (January 4, 2018). "Justin Bieber museum exhibit to open in hometown, Stratford, Ont., next month". The Toronto Star / The Canadian Press. Retrieved November 4, 2018. Friend, David (October 1, 2018). "Justin Bieber brings Hailey Baldwin to hometown exhibit on his career". CP24 / The Canadian Press. Retrieved November 4, 2018. Dodson, Claire. "Justin Bieber and Hailey Baldwin Reportedly Told a Fan They Were Married". Teen Vogue. Retrieved November 4, 2018. "Justin Bieber exhibit in Stratford extended after breaking attendance records". The Canadian Press. October 12, 2018. Retrieved October 14, 2021. "Justin Bieber makes TIME's influential list". The Independent. April 21, 2011. Retrieved May 1, 2022. Forbes 30 Under 30: 2011: "Full List: The Best-Paid Celebrities Under 30". Forbes. 2012: Milligan, Lauren. "Top 10 Under 30". Vogue. Retrieved October 23, 2018. 2013: Pomerantz, Dorothy (June 26, 2013). "2013 30 Under 30". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 23, 2018. Retrieved October 23, 2018. 2014: Pomerantz, Dorothy (November 24, 2014). "Justin Bieber Tops Forbes' List Of The Highest-Earning Celebrities Under 30". Forbes. Retrieved October 23, 2018. 2016: "The 30 Highest-Paid Celebrities Under 30 In 2016". Forbes. 2017: "The World's 30 Highest-Paid Celebrities Under 30". Forbes. "Matson on Music | The essential unseriousness of Bieber Fever". The Seattle Times. July 7, 2010. Retrieved June 1, 2012. Stevens, Heidi (December 29, 2010). "Top buzzwords of 2010". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved April 29, 2012. Hollister, Sean (November 3, 2013). "Katy Perry passes Justin Bieber as most popular person on Twitter". The Verge. Retrieved November 4, 2013. "J Balvin Reclaims His Crown as the Artist With the Most Videos in YouTube's Billion Views Club". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2023. Music videos (listed in order of release): "Baby (Official Music Video)" "Never Say Never (Official Music Video)" "Beauty And A Beat (Official Music Video)" "Where Are Ü Now (Official Video)" "What Do You Mean? (Official Music Video)" "Sorry (PURPOSE : The Movement)" "Love Yourself (Official Music Video)" "Cold Water (Official Lyric Video)" "Let Me Love You [Lyric Video]" "Let Me Love You (Official Video)" "I'm The One" Glenday, Craig, ed. (2013). Guinness World Records 2013. Random House. p. 304. ISBN 9780345547118. "Justin Bieber Accounts for 3 Percent of All Twitter Traffic". TV Guide. September 8, 2010. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved April 24, 2012. "Justin Bieber Vintage Video: 'I Love Twitter'". VH1. Archived from the original on February 15, 2011. Retrieved April 26, 2012. "Bieber Tops Twitter Trend List". World Entertainment News Network. COMTEX News Network, Inc. December 16, 2010. Retrieved April 26, 2012. Netherby, Jennifer (August 20, 2010). "Justin Bieber Joins Proactiv's Zit-Geist". Billboard. Retrieved November 7, 2018. Shin Park, Jane (October 7, 2010). "Justin Bieber Launches The One Less Lonely Girl Collection with Nicole by OPI". Teen Vogue. Retrieved November 7, 2018. Friedman, Megan (February 12, 2012). "Naturally, Justin Bieber's Nail-Polish Line Sells 1 Million Bottles". Time. Retrieved November 7, 2018. Madden, Lance (October 17, 2012). "Justin Bieber's Endorsement Gives Adidas Big Boost Off Field". Forbes. Retrieved May 10, 2014. Bueno, Antoinette (January 7, 2015). "Justin Bieber Reveals His Ab-tastic Calvin Klein Workout, But Did He Stuff Those Briefs?". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved January 29, 2018. "Justin Bieber Reveals His Ab-tastic Calvin Klein Workout, But Did He Stuff Those Briefs?". Entertainment Tonight. January 7, 2015. Lazzaro, Sage (June 5, 2015). "Kevin Harrington Teams Up With Celebs for New Curated Shopping App 'StarShop'". OBSERVER/Innovation. Retrieved June 21, 2015. "Best Buy and Dre's Beats planning new collaboration". Star Tribune. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "Justin Bieber – Endorsements, Interests, Charity Work". Celebrity Endorsers. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "Justin Bieber Gives Singer Carly Rae Jepsen a Boost". Rolling Stone. March 12, 2012. Retrieved January 9, 2019. "Madison Beer, 13-Year-Old Singer, Discovered By Justin Bieber (VIDEO)". MTV. July 19, 2012. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Vena, Jocelyn (June 23, 2011). "Justin Bieber Launches 'Someday' Fragrance". MTV. Retrieved June 21, 2015. Elliott, Stuart (June 6, 2012). "Using His Fans to Introduce a Girlfriend". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Richards, Jaime (July 15, 2011). "Bieber Breaks Beauty Sales Records Once Again With His Someday Perfume". PopSugar. Retrieved June 21, 2015. Nika, Colleen (June 21, 2012). "Update: Justin Bieber Launches Second Fragrance, 'Girlfriend'". RollingStone. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved June 21, 2015. Wilson, Gaby (July 15, 2013). "Justin Bieber Launches The Key Fragrance, Unveils Commercial Teaser". MTV. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 21, 2015. "Justin Bieber Launches His Street Style 'Drew' Clothing Line". Billboard. January 29, 2019. Retrieved November 15, 2020. Prinzivalli, Leah (May 21, 2019). "Justin Bieber Made a Natural Deodorant (Yes, Seriously)". Allure. Retrieved February 7, 2020. "Michael Cammarata on Partnering With Justin Bieber, Creating Natural Products, and More". Men's Journal. September 6, 2002. Retrieved February 7, 2020. "There's Gonna Be One Less Smelly Girl! Justin Bieber Launches New Deodorant Line". Life & Style. May 21, 2019. Retrieved February 7, 2020. "Justin Bieber x Crocs Release Date, Price Details and Where to Buy". NewsWeek. October 13, 2020. Retrieved November 15, 2020. Jordan Valinsky (February 15, 2022). "Justin Bieber almost single-handedly turned around Tim Hortons". CNN. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Teen, Vanity (February 7, 2022). "Justin Bieber Stars In Balenciga´s First 2022 Campaign Vanity Teen 虚荣青年 Lifestyle & New Faces Magazine". Vanity Teen 虚荣青年 Lifestyle & New Faces Magazine. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Justin Bieber Stars in Balenciaga 2022 Campaign". Highsnobiety. February 10, 2022. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Vespa unveils limited edition Justin Bieber collaboration". Bennets. July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. "Justin Bieber Camps Out at Tim Hortons Office to Be the First to Try His Coffee Drink in New Ad". People. February 10, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. Chloe, Melas (December 1, 2022). "Justin Bieber launches clean water company Generosity at Qatar's World Cup". CNN. Retrieved December 2, 2022. Hilary Lewis (January 23, 2014),Justin Bieber Arrested for DUI The Hollywood Reporter "Justin Bieber Talks Sex, Politics, Music and Puberty In New Rolling Stone Cover Story". Rolling Stone. February 16, 2011. Archived from the original on June 16, 2012. Retrieved February 24, 2011. Stefansky, Emma (September 15, 2018). "Justin Bieber Is Becoming a Dual Canadian-American Citizen". Vanities. "Justin Bieber buys Beverly Hills mansion for $25.8 million". Los Angeles Times. August 31, 2020. "Inside Justin And Hailey Bieber's Epic Multi-Million Dollar Lakeside Mansion In Ontario, Canada". TheTravel. April 19, 2020. "Justin Bieber: the trouble with the wild child – is it all just a dysfunctional father-son relationship?". The Guardian. January 25, 2014. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Hoffman, Claire (March 13, 2014). "Justin Bieber: Bad Boy". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 9, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2015. "Justin Bieber's Ex Caitlin Beadles Attends His Wedding to Hailey Baldwin in South Carolina". People. Ziegbe, Mawuse (December 23, 2010). "Justin Bieber Calls Selena Gomez 'An Amazing Person'". MTV. Retrieved January 6, 2012. "Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez's Dating History". Teen Vogue. August 18, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2017. Anna Lewis, Dusty Baxter-Wright (March 28, 2018). "Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez: a timeline of their relationship". Cosmopolitan. Muller, Marissa G. (March 27, 2018). "Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez May Have Broken Up for Good This Time". W Magazine. Goodman, Jessica. "Justin Bieber talks Selena Gomez-inspired songs on Ellen". Retrieved January 12, 2020. "Sofia Richie Opens Up About Justin Bieber for the First Time". Teen Vogue. September 8, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Chiu, Melody (December 19, 2019). "Justin Bieber and Sofia Richie Split After Six Weeks Together". People. Retrieved August 22, 2021. Respers France, Lisa. "Justin Bieber confirms engagement to Hailey Baldwin". CNN. Retrieved July 11, 2018. "Justin Bieber and Hailey Baldwin's Relationship Timeline". March 1, 2021. Melas, Chloe (September 15, 2018). "Justin Bieber and Hailey Baldwin got their marriage license". CNN. Retrieved September 17, 2018. Bailey, Alyssa (September 14, 2018). "Hailey Baldwin Breaks Her Silence on Justin Bieber Marriage Reports". Elle. Retrieved September 17, 2018. "Justin Bieber confirms he is a 'married man'". CNN. "Take Two! Justin Bieber and Hailey Baldwin Marry (Again) in South Carolina Ceremony: All the Details". People. Ronson, Jon (November 13, 2010). "Justin Bieber: One day with the most Googled name on the planet". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved January 25, 2011. Martinez, Jessica (May 9, 2014). "Justin Bieber Talks God's Forgiveness in Christian Rapper's Video". The Christian Post. Retrieved September 4, 2017. Tony Hicks, Justin Bieber gets baptized in a bathtub, mercurynews.com, USA, June 9, 2014 Lisa Capretto, Why Justin Bieber Was Baptized In An NBA Player's Bathtub, huffpost.com, USA, October 14, 2016 Darcy Rafter, What is Churchome? Lowdown on Justin Bieber's New Church!, hitc.com, USA, January 5, 2021 Adelekan, Timothy (July 28, 2021). "Kari Jobe & Cody Carnes - The Blessing Ft. Justin Bieber, Tori Kelly & Chandler Moore". Gospelmetrics. Retrieved August 3, 2021. "Kari Jobe, Cody Carnes, Tori Kelly, and Chance the Rapper Lead Worship During Justin Bieber's Freedom Experience Concert". CBN News. July 31, 2021. Retrieved August 3, 2021. Lowe, Zane (February 15, 2020). "The Changes Interview". Apple Music. Retrieved April 2, 2020. "Justin Bieber's Pastor Shift". Square News. January 2, 2024. "Justin Bieber's Tattoo Artist Reveals Meaning Behind Torso Ink". E! Online. October 21, 2017. Retrieved December 11, 2017. Saxberg, Lynn (February 17, 2011). "Baby Baby —better be born in Canada; Bieber disses American health care —and says no to abortion". The Ottawa Citizen. p. A.4. "Hailey Bieber Shares Reaction to Roe v. Wade Reversal: 'What an Extreme Loss'". Bieber, Justin (February 17, 2011). "Being gay is a decision & abortion is wrong". PinkNews (interview). UK. Retrieved March 15, 2011. "Justin Bieber Posts 'It Gets Better' Video" (news). MTV. Retrieved March 15, 2011. "It Gets Better" (project). Retrieved March 15, 2011. Andone, Dakine (July 21, 2019). "Justin Bieber: I appreciate Trump helping A$AP Rocky, but 'can you also let those kids out of cages?'". CNN. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Rasmussen, Aaron (November 1, 2011). "Justin Bieber: Sen. Amy Klobuchar should 'be locked up' for supporting Felony Streaming Act". New York Daily News. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Patel, Nilay (July 6, 2011). "Does Senate Bill 978 make YouTube and video game run-through videos illegal? Not really". The Verge. Retrieved April 12, 2023. "S. 978 (112th): A bill to amend the criminal penalty provision for criminal infringement of a copyright, and for other purposes". Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Valinsky, Jordan (December 22, 2020). "10 years in prison for illegal streaming? It's in the Covid-19 relief bill". CNN. Retrieved December 22, 2020. Bennett, Kate; Liptak, Kevin; Mattingly, Phil; Luhby, Tami (December 27, 2020). "Trump signs coronavirus relief and government funding bill into law after lengthy delay". CNN. Retrieved December 27, 2020. Parker, Joey (March 18, 2014). "Adam Braun On His New Book, Surviving A Near-Death Experience + Justin Bieber As A Role Model". MTV. Archived from the original on March 21, 2014. Retrieved May 10, 2014. Halperin, Shirley (July 28, 2011). "Adam Braun on Pencils of Promise and How Justin Bieber Is 'Making the World Better'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Halperin, Shirley (July 28, 2011). "Adam Braun on Pencils of Promise and How Justin Bieber Is 'Making the World Better'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 30, 2013. "Schools4All official website". Schools4all.org. Archived from the original on June 25, 2013. Retrieved July 6, 2013. Walker, Caroline (April 15, 2011). "Justin Bieber wants (a) Schools for all (b) To visit you, or (c) Both?". MTV website. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2013. "Justin Bieber Partners with Pencils of Promise for Second Annual Schools4All Campaign" (Press release). PR Newswire. Halperin, Shirley (July 20, 2011). "Justin Bieber: 'With Time Off, I'm Able to Think, Pray and Grow Up'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 30, 2013. "Justin Bieber supports new PETA campaign". hindustantimes. Retrieved November 15, 2020. "Justin Bieber's Hair Raises Funds For Charity". NPR. Retrieved November 15, 2020. "Justin Bieber donates Japan concert proceeds". digitalspy. Retrieved November 15, 2020. "Justin Bieber Donates $100,000 To Las Vegas Elementary School". Capitalfm. Retrieved November 15, 2020. "Justin Bieber's 18th Birthday Wish Is To Raise Money For Charity Water". HuffPost. Retrieved November 15, 2020. "Justin Bieber Awarded Star On Philippine Walk Fame For Typhoon Haiyan Campaign". inquisitr. June 2014. "Justin Bieber – Endorsements, Interests, Charity Work". Celebrity Endorsers. Retrieved October 21, 2017. "Thanks Dr. Dre And Gaga: Celebrity Endorsements Boost Headphone Sales". Billboard. Retrieved October 21, 2017. "Justin Bieber Donates To Hurricane Harvey Relief". iHeartRadio. Retrieved November 15, 2020. "Justin Bieber makes a superfan's dream come true with $100K check". Vanguard News. February 9, 2020. Retrieved November 26, 2021. "Justin Bieber makes a superfan's dream come true with $100K check". New York Post. February 7, 2020. Retrieved October 10, 2021. "Justin Bieber Donates to Chinese Charity Amid Coronavirus Spread". Billboard. Retrieved November 15, 2020. Curto, Justin (May 1, 2020). "It Took the Coronavirus to Get Justin Bieber and Ariana Grande on the Same Song". Vulture. Retrieved May 8, 2020. Asmelash, Leah (May 3, 2020). "Ariana Grande and Justin Bieber are collaborating on a new track, and you could be in the music video". CNN. Retrieved May 8, 2020. "Justin Bieber and Ariana Grande's 'Stuck With U' raises over $3.5 million for charity". NME. August 5, 2021. "Justin Bieber and Chance The Rapper Are Donating $250,000 to Fans Battling 'Hard Times'". Billboard. Retrieved November 15, 2020. Atkinson, Katie (April 1, 2021). "Bieber visited the LA County prison to meet with a group of inmates & learn about the maximum-security institution's faith-based programs". Billboard. Retrieved April 2, 2021. "Justin Bieber says mission trip to California state prison was a "life-changing experience"". ABC News Radio. April 2, 2021. Archived from the original on January 20, 2023. Retrieved April 2, 2021. Vincent, Brittany (September 3, 2019). "Justin Bieber Shares How 'Access to Whatever I Wanted' Shaped his Struggles with Mental Health". MTV. Retrieved April 5, 2020. "Justin Bieber says he's 'been struggling a lot'". CBC News. March 11, 2019. Retrieved April 5, 2020. Abrams, Margaret (January 27, 2020). "Justin Bieber reveals struggles with anxiety and opens up about his marriage in new Seasons documentary trailer". Evening Standard. Ariola, Katrina (February 5, 2020). "Justin Bieber: How The 'Yummy' Singer Suffered From The Consequences Of Hollywood Fame". International Business Times. Retrieved April 5, 2020. Scott, Katie (September 3, 2019). "ENTERTAINMENT Justin Bieber posts emotional message about use of 'heavy drugs,' depression". Global News. Retrieved April 5, 2020. Bueckert, Kate (March 30, 2019). "Justin Bieber being open about his mental health will help youth, experts say". CBC. Retrieved April 5, 2020. February 3, Rosy Cordero; EST, 2020 at 06:46 PM. "Justin Bieber gets candid about mental health struggles and addiction in docuseries 'Seasons'". EW.com. Retrieved March 4, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Justin Bieber reveals Lyme disease diagnosis". NBC News. January 9, 2020. Haring, Bruce (February 20, 2022). "Justin Bieber Tests Positive For Covid-19, Postpones At Least One Concert Date". Deadline. Retrieved February 20, 2022. France, Lisa Respers (June 10, 2022). "Justin Bieber says he has facial paralysis due to Ramsay Hunt syndrome". CNN. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Billboard, Gil Kaufman (June 17, 2022). "Justin Bieber Postpones Summerfest Appearance, Justice Tour Dates Amid Ramsay Hunt Recovery". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 6, 2022. "Justin Bieber to Resume 'Justice' Tour After Ramsay Hunt Diagnosis". July 19, 2022. DeSantis, Rachel (September 6, 2022). "Justin Bieber Cancels Remaining Tour Dates to Make His Health the 'Priority Right Now'". People. Dotdash Meredith. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Anderson, Curt; Kay, Jennifer. "Bieber's image: From boy-next-door to bad boy". Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved January 25, 2014. "Justin Bieber on Miami drink-drive charge after 'road racing'". BBC News. January 23, 2014. Archived from the original on March 31, 2014. Retrieved January 25, 2014. "Justin Bieber investigated by LA sheriffs over alleged 'egging' incident". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 16, 2014. Retrieved July 10, 2014. "Justin Bieber gets two years' probation in egging case". BBC News. Archived from the original on July 11, 2014. Retrieved July 10, 2014. Oldenburg, Ann (January 23, 2014). "Justin Bieber arrested in Miami". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 30, 2014. Retrieved January 23, 2014. "Justin Bieber arrest report". San Francisco Chronicle. January 23, 2014. Archived from the original on February 26, 2014. Retrieved January 30, 2014. "Justin Bieber Leaves Jail After DUI Charge". Sky News. Archived from the original on March 30, 2014. Retrieved January 23, 2014. Saad, Nardine (January 30, 2014). "Justin Bieber's toxicology report released; Toronto mayor sympathizes". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 22, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2014. Oldenburg, Ann (January 30, 2014). "Justin Bieber toxicology report: Marijuana, Xanax". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2014. "Justin Bieber reflects on his DUI arrest seven years later: 'Not proud of where I was'". USA Today. January 25, 2021. "White House Responds To 'Deport Justin Bieber' Petition, Refuse To Comment". ENTmania.com. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved June 20, 2015. Lear, Samantha (January 1, 2014). "Is Justin Bieber in Danger of Deportation? Not Really, Says a Legal Expert Exclusive". wetpaint.com. Retrieved June 25, 2015. Duke, Alan (April 16, 2013). "Justin Bieber hopes Anne Frank 'would have been a belieber'". CNN. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Carlson, Adam (April 15, 2013). "Anne Frank House responds to Justin Bieber controversy". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 21, 2021. "Anger over Justin Bieber's Anne Frank message". BBC News. April 14, 2013. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Rocha, Veronica; Truong, Debbie. "Justin Bieber pleads no contest to vandalism in egging incident". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 10, 2014. Retrieved July 10, 2014. "Justin Bieber gets two years probation for egg pelting". Reuters. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 10, 2014. Winton, Richard. "Justin Bieber high-fived friends after neighbor's home egged, cops say". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 11, 2014. Retrieved July 10, 2014. Anderson, Curt. "Justin Bieber pleads guilty in deal in Florida". Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 15, 2014. Retrieved August 23, 2014. "Justin Bieber pleads guilty to careless driving in deal". CNN. August 13, 2014. Archived from the original on August 23, 2014. Retrieved August 23, 2014. Gillies, Rob. "Bieber charged with assault over photo incident". Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 3, 2014. Retrieved September 3, 2014. Hemmings, Chris (September 2, 2014). "Justin Bieber charged with assault and dangerous driving". Archived from the original on September 2, 2014. Retrieved September 2, 2014. Martell, Allison; Hodgson, Jeffrey (January 30, 2014). "Canadian police charge Justin Bieber with assaulting limo driver". Reuters. Archived from the original on March 25, 2014. Retrieved January 30, 2014. "UPDATE 2-Justin Bieber assault charge dropped in Canada". Reuters. Archived from the original on September 11, 2014. Retrieved September 11, 2014. Michaels, Sean. "Justin Bieber must return to Argentina – and Interpol are on his trail". The Guardian. Retrieved November 16, 2014. "Argentine court orders arrest of Justin Bieber over assault claim". Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 7, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2015. "Justin Bieber Apologizes: 'I'm Not Who I Was Pretending to Be'". Rolling Stone. January 29, 2015. Archived from the original on November 19, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2015. "Video of young Justin Bieber telling racist joke leaks". Entertainment Weekly. June 1, 2014. Retrieved September 5, 2015. "Here's Another Video of Justin Bieber Being Racist". Time. June 4, 2014. Retrieved September 5, 2015. "Justin Bieber Loses Again: How His Racist Jokes Will Impact His Career". Billboard. June 5, 2014. Retrieved September 5, 2015. "Justin Bieber apologizes (again) for racist parody, KKK remarks". Los Angeles Times. June 5, 2014. Retrieved September 5, 2015. "留言详情". Beijing Municipal Bureau of Culture. Archived from the original on August 18, 2017. Retrieved August 18, 2017. "Justin Bieber banned from China in order to 'purify' nation". Telegraph UK. July 21, 2017. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved August 18, 2017. "Why Justin Bieber, Lady Gaga, and BTS Are Cut From 'Friends' Reunion in China". vice.com. May 27, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2021. Ivie, Devon (June 21, 2020). "Justin Bieber Accused of Sexual Assault by Two Women". Vulture. "Justin Bieber denies 2014 sexual assault allegation, shows receipts of Airbnb stay with Selena Gomez". Entertainment Weekly. Bieber, Justin (September 13, 2012). Justin Bieber: Just Getting Started (100% Official). HarperCollins Publishers. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-00-745785-4. Bieber, Justin (October 12, 2010). Justin Bieber: First Step 2 Forever: My Story. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-203974-3.. Bloom, Ronny (April 15, 2010). Justin Bieber. Penguin Group USA. ISBN 978-0-8431-9903-1.. Mallette, Pattie; A. J. Gregory (September 18, 2012). Nowhere but Up: The Story of Justin Bieber's Mom. Baker Books. ISBN 978-1-4412-4028-6. Newkey-Burden, Chas (September 1, 2010). Justin Bieber: The Unauthorized Biography. Michael O'Mara. ISBN 978-1-84317-523-0.. Oliver, Sarah (October 1, 2011). Justin Bieber A–Z. John Blake. ISBN 978-1-84358-379-0.. Parvis, Sarah; Herman, Gail (February 8, 2011). Superstars! Justin Bieber: In the Spotlight and Behind the Scenes. Time Home Entertainment. ISBN 978-1-60320-902-1.. Shapiro, Marc (August 17, 2010). Justin Bieber: The Fever!. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-67878-4. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Justin Bieber. Wikiquote has quotations related to Justin Bieber. Official website Justin Bieber at AllMusic Justin Bieber at IMDb Portals:  Biography  Pop music