Edson Arantes do Nascimento (Brazilian Portuguese: [ˈɛtsõ aˈɾɐ̃tʃiz du nasiˈmẽtu]; 23 October 1940 – 29 December 2022), better known by his nickname Pelé (Portuguese pronunciation: [peˈlɛ]), was a Brazilian professional footballer who played as a forward. Widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time, he was among the most successful and popular sports figures of the 20th century. In 1999, he was named Athlete of the Century by the International Olympic Committee and was included in the Time list of the 100 most important people of the 20th century. In 2000, Pelé was voted World Player of the Century by the International Federation of Football History & Statistics (IFFHS) and was one of the two joint winners of the FIFA Player of the Century. His 1,279 goals in 1,363 games, which includes friendlies, is recognised as a Guinness World Record. Pelé began playing for Santos at age 15 and the Brazil national team at 16. During his international career, he won three FIFA World Cups: 1958, 1962 and 1970, the only player to do so and the youngest player to win a World Cup (17). He was nicknamed O Rei (The King) following the 1958 tournament. With 77 goals in 92 games for Brazil, Pelé held the record as the national team's top goalscorer for over fifty years. At club level, he is Santos's all-time top goalscorer with 643 goals in 659 games. In a golden era for Santos, he led the club to the 1962 and 1963 Copa Libertadores, and to the 1962 and 1963 Intercontinental Cup. Credited with connecting the phrase "The Beautiful Game" with football, Pelé's "electrifying play and penchant for spectacular goals" made him a star around the world, and his teams toured internationally to take full advantage of his popularity. During his playing days, Pelé was for a period the best-paid athlete in the world. After retiring in 1977, Pelé was a worldwide ambassador for football and made many acting and commercial ventures. In 2010, he was named the honorary president of the New York Cosmos. Averaging almost a goal per game throughout his career, Pelé was adept at striking the ball with either foot in addition to anticipating his opponents' movements on the field. While predominantly a striker, he could also drop deep and take on a playmaking role, providing assists with his vision and passing ability, and he would also use his dribbling skills to go past opponents. In Brazil, he was hailed as a national hero for his accomplishments in football and for his outspoken support of policies that improve the social conditions of the poor. His emergence at the 1958 World Cup, where he became a black global sporting star, was a source of inspiration. Throughout his career and in his retirement, Pelé received numerous individual and team awards for his performance on the field, his record-breaking achievements, and his legacy in the sport. Pelé was born Edson Arantes do Nascimento on 23 October 1940 in Três Corações, Minas Gerais, the son of Fluminense footballer Dondinho (born João Ramos do Nascimento) and Celeste Arantes (born November 1922). He was the elder of two siblings, with brother Zoca also playing for Santos, albeit not as successfully. He was named after the American inventor Thomas Edison. His parents decided to remove the "i" and call him "Edson", but there was a typo on his birth certificate, leading many documents to show his name as "Edison", not "Edson", as he was called. He was originally nicknamed "Dico" by his family. He received the nickname "Pelé" during his school days, it is claimed,[by whom?] after mispronouncing the name of his favourite player, Vasco da Gama goalkeeper Bilé. In his autobiography released in 2006, Pelé stated he had no idea what the name means, nor did his old friends, and the word has no meaning in Portuguese. Pelé grew up in poverty in Bauru in the state of São Paulo. He earned extra money by working in tea shops as a servant. Taught to play by his father, he could not afford a proper football and usually played with either a sock stuffed with newspaper and tied with string or a grapefruit. He played for several amateur teams in his youth, including Sete de Setembro, Canto do Rio, São Paulinho, and Ameriquinha. Pelé led Bauru Atlético Clube juniors (coached by Waldemar de Brito) to two São Paulo state youth championships. In his mid-teens, he played for an indoor football team called Radium. Indoor football had just become popular in Bauru when Pelé began playing it. He was part of the first futsal (indoor football) competition in the region. Pelé and his team won the first championship and several others. According to Pelé, futsal (indoor football) presented difficult challenges: he said it was a lot quicker than football on the grass, and that players were required to think faster because everyone is close to each other in the pitch. Pelé credits futsal for helping him think better on the spot. In addition, futsal allowed him to play with adults when he was about 14 years old. In one of the tournaments he participated in, he was initially considered too young to play, but eventually went on to end up top scorer with 14 or 15 goals. "That gave me a lot of confidence", Pelé said, "I knew then not to be afraid of whatever might come". In 1956, de Brito took Pelé to Santos, an industrial and port city located near São Paulo, to try out for professional club Santos FC, telling the club's directors that the 15-year-old would be "the greatest football player in the world". Pelé impressed Santos coach Lula during his trial at the Estádio Vila Belmiro, and he signed a professional contract with the club in June 1956. Pelé was highly promoted in the local media as a future superstar. He made his senior team debut on 7 September 1956 at the age of 15 against Corinthians de Santo André and had an impressive performance in a 7–1 victory, scoring the first goal in his prolific career during the match. When the 1957 season started, Pelé was given a starting place in the first team and, at the age of 16, became the top scorer in the league. Ten months after signing professionally, the teenager was called up to the Brazil national team. After the 1958 and the 1962 World Cup, wealthy European clubs, such as Real Madrid, Juventus and Manchester United, tried to sign him in vain. In 1958, Inter Milan even managed to get him a regular contract, but Angelo Moratti was forced to tear the contract up at the request of Santos's chairman following a revolt by Santos's Brazilian fans. Valencia CF also arranged an agreement that would have brought Pelé to the club after the 1958 World Cup, however after his performances at the tournament, Santos declined to let the player leave. In 1961 the government of Brazil under President Jânio Quadros declared Pelé an "official national treasure" to prevent him from being transferred out of the country. Pelé won his first major title with Santos in 1958 as the team won the Campeonato Paulista; he would finish the tournament as the top scorer, with 58 goals, a record that still stands today. A year later, he would help the team earn their first victory in the Torneio Rio-São Paulo with a 3–0 over Vasco da Gama. However, Santos was unable to retain the Paulista title. In 1960, Pelé scored 33 goals to help his team regain the Campeonato Paulista trophy but lost out on the Rio-São Paulo tournament after finishing in 8th place. In the 1960 season, Pelé scored 47 goals and helped Santos regain the Campeonato Paulista. The club went on to win the Taça Brasil that same year, beating Bahia in the finals; Pelé finished as the top scorer of the tournament with nine goals. The victory allowed Santos to participate in the Copa Libertadores, the most prestigious club tournament in the Western hemisphere. "I arrived hoping to stop a great man, but I went away convinced I had been undone by someone who was not born on the same planet as the rest of us." —Benfica goalkeeper Costa Pereira following the loss to Santos in 1962. Santos's most successful Copa Libertadores season started in 1962; the team was seeded in Group One alongside Cerro Porteño and Deportivo Municipal Bolivia, winning every match of their group but one (a 1–1 away tie versus Cerro). Santos defeated Universidad Católica in the semi-finals and met defending champions Peñarol in the finals. Pelé scored twice in the playoff match to secure the first title for a Brazilian club. Pelé finished as the second top scorer of the competition with four goals. That same year, Santos would successfully defend the Campeonato Paulista (with 37 goals from Pelé) and the Taça Brasil (Pelé scoring four goals in the final series against Botafogo). Santos would also win the 1962 Intercontinental Cup against Benfica. Wearing his number 10 shirt, Pelé produced one of the best performances of his career, scoring a hat-trick in Lisbon as Santos won 5–2. Pelé states that his most memorable goal was scored at the Estádio Rua Javari on a Campeonato Paulista match against São Paulo rival Clube Atlético Juventus on 2 August 1959. As there is no video footage of this match, Pelé asked that a computer animation be made of this specific goal. In March 1961, Pelé scored the gol de placa (goal worthy of a plaque), against Fluminense at the Maracanã. Pelé received the ball on the edge of his own penalty area, and ran the length of the field, eluding opposition players with feints, before striking the ball beyond the goalkeeper. A plaque was commissioned with a dedication to "the most beautiful goal in the history of the Maracanã". As the defending champions, Santos qualified automatically to the semi-final stage of the 1963 Copa Libertadores. The balé branco (white ballet), the nickname given to Santos at the time, managed to retain the title after victories over Botafogo and Boca Juniors. Pelé helped Santos overcome a Botafogo team that featured Brazilian greats such as Garrincha and Jairzinho with a last-minute goal in the first leg of the semi-finals which made it 1–1. In the second leg, Pelé scored a hat-trick in the Estádio do Maracanã as Santos won, 0–4, in the second leg. Santos started the final series by winning, 3–2, in the first leg and defeating Boca Juniors 1–2, in La Bombonera. It was a rare feat in official competitions, with another goal from Pelé. Santos became the first Brazilian team to lift the Copa Libertadores in Argentine soil. Pelé finished the tournament with five goals. Santos lost the Campeonato Paulista after finishing in third place but went on to win the Rio-São Paulo tournament after a 0–3 win over Flamengo in the final, with Pelé scoring one goal. Pelé would also help Santos retain the Intercontinental Cup and the Taça Brasil against AC Milan and Bahia respectively. In the 1964 Copa Libertadores, Santos was beaten in both legs of the semi-finals by Independiente. The club won the Campeonato Paulista, with Pelé netting 34 goals. Santos also shared the Rio-São Paulo title with Botafogo and won the Taça Brasil for the fourth consecutive year. In the 1965 Copa Libertadores, Santos reached the semi-finals and met Peñarol in a rematch of the 1962 final. After two matches, a playoff was needed to break the tie. Unlike 1962, Peñarol came out on top and eliminated Santos 2–1. Pelé would, however, finish as the top scorer of the tournament with eight goals. In December 1965, Santos won the Taça Brasil, their fifth straight Brazilian league title, with Pelé scoring the last goal in the final series. In 1966, Santos failed to retain the Taça Brasil as Pelé's goals were not enough to prevent a 9–4 defeat by Cruzeiro (led by Tostão) in the final series. The club did, however, win the Campeonato Paulista in 1967, 1968, and 1969. On 19 November 1969, Pelé scored his 1,000th goal in all competitions, in what was a highly anticipated moment in Brazil. The goal dubbed O Milésimo (The Thousandth), occurred in a match against Vasco da Gama, when Pelé scored from a penalty kick, at the Maracanã Stadium. In 1969, the two factions involved in the Nigerian Civil War agreed to a 48-hour ceasefire so they could watch Pelé play an exhibition game in Lagos. Santos ended up playing to a 2–2 draw with Lagos side Stationary Stores FC and Pelé scored his team's goals. The civil war went on for one more year after this game. During his time at Santos, Pelé played alongside many gifted players, including Zito, Pepe, and Coutinho; the latter partnered him in numerous one-two plays, attacks, and goals. After Pelé's 19th season with Santos, he left Brazilian football. Pelé's 643 goals for Santos were the most goals scored for a single club until it was surpassed by Lionel Messi of Barcelona in December 2020. Even though he never played in a European league, Pelé played exhibition games in several countries all over the world in tours with Santos. He played in Spain against Real Madrid and Barcelona, in Italy against Juventus, Inter Milan, AC Milan and AS Roma. Pelé travelled to Egypt in 1973, and played with Santos against Al Ahly. This trip was days after his team's trip to Kuwait to play a match against Qadsia. In Kuwait, Pelé met by chance the Egyptian movie star Zubaida Tharwat, who was in Kuwait attending a cinematic event. The two had a couple of photos and he admired her beauty. She said in a television interview about this incident that: she had traveled to Kuwait City in 1973 at the invitation of the Kuwaiti Minister of Culture at the time, and when she went to the hotel where she was going to stay, she was surprised by the presence of many people and flowers inside the hotel, and among these people came to her "Pelé" wearing a collar of roses, and he removed it from him and put it on her. When she asked what was going on and who was this person, whom she did not know because she did not like football, the hotel staff told her that he was the famous Brazilian football player, and that the hotel was crowded with his fans who wanted to see him. Zubaida Tharwat stated that after he saw her for the first time inside the hotel where they happened to be, he kept chasing her day and night, and wanted to take her with him to Brazil. By chance, the next stop for Pelé's tour was to Cairo, and he met again with Tharwat, who stated that she could not communicate with him as he did not speak English at the time. After the 1974 season (his 19th with Santos), Pelé retired from Brazilian club football although he continued to occasionally play for Santos in official competitive matches. A year later, he came out of semi-retirement to sign with the New York Cosmos of the North American Soccer League (NASL) for the 1975 season. At a chaotic press conference at New York's 21 Club, the Cosmos unveiled Pelé. John O'Reilly, the club's media spokesman, stated, "We had superstars in the United States but nothing at the level of Pelé. Everyone wanted to touch him, shake his hand, get a photo with him." Though well past his prime at this point, Pelé was credited with significantly increasing public awareness and interest of the sport in the US. During his first public appearance in Boston, he was injured by a crowd of fans who had surrounded him and was evacuated on a stretcher. Pelé made his debut for the Cosmos on 15 June 1975 against the Dallas Tornado at Downing Stadium, scoring one goal in a 2–2 draw. Pelé opened the door for many other stars to play in North America. Giorgio Chinaglia followed him to the Cosmos, then Franz Beckenbauer and his former Santos teammate Carlos Alberto. Over the next few years other players came to the league, including Johan Cruyff, Eusébio, Bobby Moore, George Best and Gordon Banks. In 1975, one week before the Lebanese Civil War, Pelé played a friendly game for the Lebanese club Nejmeh against a team of Lebanese Premier League stars, scoring two goals which were not included in his official tally. On the day of the game, 40,000 spectators were at the stadium from early morning to watch the match. Pelé led the Cosmos to the 1977 Soccer Bowl, in his third and final season with the club. In June 1977, the Cosmos attracted an NASL record 62,394 fans to Giants Stadium for a 3–0 victory past the Tampa Bay Rowdies with a 37-year-old Pelé scoring a hat-trick. In the first leg of the quarter-finals, they attracted a US record crowd of 77,891 for what turned into an 8–3 rout of the Fort Lauderdale Strikers at Giants Stadium. In the second leg of the semi-finals against the Rochester Lancers, the Cosmos won 4–1. Pelé finished his official playing career on 28 August 1977, by leading the New York Cosmos to their second Soccer Bowl title with a 2–1 win over the Seattle Sounders at the Civic Stadium in Portland, Oregon. On 1 October 1977, Pelé closed out his career in an exhibition match between the Cosmos and Santos. The match was played in front of a sold-out crowd at Giants Stadium and was televised in the US on ABC's Wide World of Sports as well as throughout the world. Pelé's father and wife both attended the match, as well as Muhammad Ali and Bobby Moore. Delivering a message to the audience before the start of the game—"Love is more important than what we can take in life"—Pelé played the first half with the Cosmos, the second with Santos. The game ended with the Cosmos winning 2–1, with Pelé scoring with a 30-yard free-kick for the Cosmos in what was the final goal of his career. During the second half, it started to rain, prompting a Brazilian newspaper to come out with the headline the following day: "Even The Sky Was Crying." Pelé's first international match was a 2–1 defeat against Argentina on 7 July 1957 at the Maracanã. In that match, he scored his first goal for Brazil aged 16 years and nine months, and he remains the youngest goalscorer for his country. Pelé arrived in Sweden sidelined by a knee injury but on his return from the treatment room, his colleagues stood together and insisted upon his selection. His first match was against the USSR in the third match of the first round of the 1958 FIFA World Cup, where he gave the assist to Vavá's second goal. He was at the time the youngest player ever to participate in the World Cup. Against France in the semi-final, Brazil was leading 2–1 at halftime, and then Pelé scored a hat-trick, becoming the youngest player in World Cup history to do so. On 29 June 1958, Pelé became the youngest player to play in a World Cup final match at 17 years and 249 days. He scored two goals in that final as Brazil beat Sweden 5–2 in Stockholm, the capital. Pelé hit the post and then Vavá scored two goals to give Brazil the lead. Pelé's first goal, where he flicked the ball over a defender before volleying into the corner of the net, was selected as one of the best goals in the history of the World Cup. Following Pelé's second goal, Swedish player Sigvard Parling would later comment, "When Pelé scored the fifth goal in that Final, I have to be honest and say I felt like applauding". When the match ended, Pelé passed out on the field, and was revived by Garrincha. He then recovered, and was compelled by the victory to weep as he was being congratulated by his teammates. He finished the tournament with six goals in four matches played, tied for second place, behind record-breaker Just Fontaine, and was named best young player of the tournament. His impact was arguably greater off the field, with Barney Ronay writing, "With nothing but talent to guide him, the boy from Minas Gerais became the first black global sporting superstar, and a source of genuine uplift and inspiration." It was in the 1958 World Cup that Pelé began wearing a jersey with the number 10. The event was the result of disorganization: the leaders of the Brazilian Federation did not allocate the shirt numbers of players and it was up to FIFA to choose the number 10 shirt for Pelé, who was a substitute on the occasion. The press proclaimed Pelé the greatest revelation of the 1958 World Cup, and he was also retroactively given the Silver Ball as the second best player of the tournament, behind Didi. Pelé also played in the South American Championship. In the 1959 competition he was named best player of the tournament and was the top scorer with eight goals, as Brazil came second despite being unbeaten in the tournament. He scored in five of Brazil's six games, including two goals against Chile and a hat-trick against Paraguay. When the 1962 World Cup started, Pelé was considered the best player in the world. In the first match of the 1962 World Cup in Chile, against Mexico, Pelé assisted the first goal and then scored the second one, after a run past four defenders, to go up 2–0. He got injured in the next game while attempting a long-range shot against Czechoslovakia. This would keep him out of the rest of the tournament, and forced coach Aymoré Moreira to make his only lineup change of the tournament. The substitute was Amarildo, who performed well for the rest of the tournament. However, it was Garrincha who would take the leading role and carry Brazil to their second World Cup title, after beating Czechoslovakia at the final in Santiago. At the time, only players who appeared in the final were eligible for a medal before FIFA regulations were changed in 1978 to include the entire squad, with Pelé receiving his winner's medal retroactively in 2007. Pelé was the most famous footballer in the world during the 1966 World Cup in England, and Brazil fielded some world champions like Garrincha, Gilmar and Djalma Santos with the addition of other stars like Jairzinho, Tostão and Gérson, leading to high expectations for them. Brazil was eliminated in the first round, playing only three matches. The World Cup was marked, among other things, for brutal fouls on Pelé that left him injured by the Bulgarian and Portuguese defenders. Pelé scored the first goal from a free kick against Bulgaria, becoming the first player to score in three successive FIFA World Cups, but due to his injury, a result of persistent fouling by the Bulgarians, he missed the second game against Hungary. His coach stated that after the first game he felt "every team will take care of him in the same manner". Brazil lost that game and Pelé, although still recovering, was brought back for the last crucial match against Portugal at Goodison Park in Liverpool by the Brazilian coach Vicente Feola. Feola changed the entire defense, including the goalkeeper, while in midfield he returned to the formation of the first match. During the game, Portugal defender João Morais fouled Pelé, but was not sent off by referee George McCabe; a decision retrospectively viewed as being among the worst refereeing errors in World Cup history. Pelé had to stay on the field limping for the rest of the game since substitutes were not allowed in football at that time. Brazil lost the match against the Portuguese led by Eusébio and were eliminated from the tournament as a result. After this game he vowed he would never again play in the World Cup, a decision he would later change. Pelé was called to the national team in early 1969, he refused at first, but then accepted and played in six World Cup qualifying matches, scoring six goals. The 1970 World Cup in Mexico was expected to be Pelé's last. Brazil's squad for the tournament featured major changes to the 1966 squad. Players like Garrincha, Nilton Santos, Valdir Pereira, Djalma Santos, and Gilmar had already retired. However, Brazil's 1970 World Cup squad, which included players like Pelé, Rivellino, Jairzinho, Gérson, Carlos Alberto Torres, Tostão and Clodoaldo, is often considered to be the greatest football team in history. The front five of Jairzinho, Pelé, Gerson, Tostão, and Rivellino together created an attacking momentum, with Pelé having a central role in Brazil's way to the final. All of Brazil's matches in the tournament (except the final) were played in Guadalajara, and in the first match against Czechoslovakia, Pelé gave Brazil a 2–1 lead, by controlling Gerson's 50-yard pass with his chest and then scoring. In this match Pelé attempted to lob goalkeeper Ivo Viktor from the halfway line, only narrowly missing the Czechoslovak goal. Brazil went on to win the match, 4–1. In the first half of the match against England, Pelé nearly scored with a header that was saved by the England goalkeeper Gordon Banks. Pelé recalled he was already shouting "Goal" when he headed the ball. It was often referred to as the "save of the century". In the second half, he controlled a cross from Tostão before flicking the ball to Jairzinho who scored the only goal. Against Romania, Pelé scored two goals, which included a 20-yard bending free-kick, with Brazil winning 3–2. In the quarter-final against Peru, Brazil won 4–2, with Pelé assisting Tostão for Brazil's third goal. In the semi-final, Brazil faced Uruguay for the first time since the 1950 World Cup final round match. Jairzinho put Brazil ahead 2–1, and Pelé assisted Rivellino for the 3–1. During that match, Pelé made one of his most famous plays. Tostão passed the ball for Pelé to collect which Uruguay's goalkeeper Ladislao Mazurkiewicz took notice of and ran off his line to get the ball before Pelé. However, Pelé got there first and fooled Mazurkiewicz with a feint by not touching the ball, causing it to roll to the goalkeeper's left, while Pelé went to the goalkeeper's right. Pelé ran around the goalkeeper to retrieve the ball and took a shot while turning towards the goal, but he turned in excess as he shot, and the ball drifted just wide of the far post. "I have scored more than a thousand goals in my life and the thing people always talk to me about is the one I didn't score." — Pelé on the extraordinary save by England goalkeeper Gordon Banks in their 1970 World Cup match. Brazil played Italy in the final at the Azteca Stadium in Mexico City. Pelé scored the opening goal with a header after out jumping Italian defender Tarcisio Burgnich. Brazil's 100th World Cup goal, Pelé's leap of joy into the arms of teammate Jairzinho in celebrating the goal is regarded as one of the most iconic moments in World Cup history. He then made assists for Brazil's third goal, scored by Jairzinho, and the fourth finished by Carlos Alberto. The last goal of the game is often considered the greatest team goal of all time because it involved all but two of the team's outfield players. The play culminated after Pelé made a blind pass that went into Carlos Alberto's running trajectory. He came running from behind and struck the ball to score. Brazil won the match 4–1, keeping the Jules Rimet Trophy indefinitely, and Pelé received the Golden Ball as the player of the tournament. Burgnich, who marked Pelé during the final, was quoted saying, "I told myself before the game, he's made of skin and bones just like everyone else – but I was wrong". In terms of his goals and assists throughout the 1970 World Cup, Pelé was directly responsible for 53% of Brazil's goals throughout the tournament. Pelé's last international match was on 18 July 1971 against Yugoslavia in Rio de Janeiro. With Pelé on the field, the Brazilian team's record was 67 wins, 14 draws, and 11 losses. Brazil never lost a match while fielding both Pelé and Garrincha. Pele's 77 goals (in 92 games) for Brazil saw him hold the record as the national team's top goalscorer for over fifty years until it was surpassed by Neymar (in his 125th game) in September 2023. Pelé has also been known for connecting the phrase "The Beautiful Game" with football. A prolific goalscorer, he was known for his ability to anticipate opponents in the area and finish off chances with an accurate and powerful shot with either foot. Pelé was also a hard-working team player, and a complete forward, with exceptional vision and intelligence, who was recognised for his precise passing and ability to link up with teammates and provide them with assists. In his early career, he played in a variety of attacking positions. Although he usually operated inside the penalty area as a main striker or centre forward, his wide range of skills also allowed him to play in a more withdrawn role, as an inside forward or second striker, or out wide. In his later career, he took on more of a deeper playmaking role behind the strikers, often functioning as an attacking midfielder. Pelé's unique playing style combined speed, creativity, and technical skill with physical power, stamina, and athleticism. His excellent technique, balance, flair, agility, and dribbling skills enabled him to beat opponents with the ball, and frequently saw him use sudden changes of direction and elaborate feints to get past players, such as his trademark move, the drible da vaca. Another one of his signature moves was the paradinha, or little stop. Despite his relatively small stature, 1.73 metres (5 feet 8 inches), he excelled in the air, due to his heading accuracy, timing, and elevation. Renowned for his bending shots, he was also an accurate free-kick taker, and penalty taker, although he often refrained from taking penalties, stating that he believed it to be a cowardly way to score. Pelé was also known to be a fair and highly influential player, who stood out for his charismatic leadership and sportsmanship on the pitch. His warm embrace of Bobby Moore following the Brazil vs England game at the 1970 World Cup is viewed as the embodiment of sportsmanship, with The New York Times stating the image "captured the respect that two great players had for each other. As they exchanged jerseys, touches, and looks, the sportsmanship between them is all in the image. No gloating, no fist-pumping from Pelé. No despair, no defeatism from Bobby Moore." Pelé also earned a reputation for often being a decisive player for his teams, due to his tendency to score crucial goals in important matches. Among the most successful and popular sports figures of the 20th century, Pelé is one of the most lauded players in the history of football and has been frequently ranked the best player ever. Following his emergence at the 1958 World Cup he was nicknamed O Rei ("The King"). Among his contemporaries, Dutch star Johan Cruyff stated, "Pelé was the only footballer who surpassed the boundaries of logic." Brazil's 1970 World Cup-winning captain Carlos Alberto Torres opined: "His great secret was improvisation. Those things he did were in one moment. He had an extraordinary perception of the game." According to Tostão, his strike partner at the 1970 World Cup: "Pelé was the greatest – he was simply flawless. And off the pitch he is always smiling and upbeat. You never see him bad-tempered. He loves being Pelé." His Brazilian teammate Clodoaldo commented on the adulation he witnessed: "In some countries they wanted to touch him, in some they wanted to kiss him. In others they even kissed the ground he walked on. I thought it was beautiful, just beautiful." According to Franz Beckenbauer, West Germany's 1974 World Cup-winning captain: "Pelé is the greatest player of all time. He reigned supreme for 20 years. There's no one to compare with him." "I used to go out and people said Pelé! Pelé! Pelé! Pelé! all over the world, but no one remembers Edson. Edson is the person who has the feelings, who has the family, who works hard, and Pelé is the idol. Pelé doesn't die. Pelé will never die. Pelé is going to go on for ever. But Edson is a normal person who is going to die one day, and the people forget that." — Pelé on his lasting legacy. Former Real Madrid and Hungary star Ferenc Puskás stated: "The greatest player in history was Di Stéfano. I refuse to classify Pelé as a player. He was above that." Just Fontaine, French striker and the leading scorer at the 1958 World Cup said "When I saw Pelé play, it made me feel I should hang up my boots." England's 1966 FIFA World Cup-winning captain Bobby Moore commented: "Pelé was the most complete player I've ever seen, he had everything. Two good feet. Magic in the air. Quick. Powerful. Could beat people with skill. Could outrun people. Only five feet and eight inches tall, yet he seemed a giant of an athlete on the pitch. Perfect balance and impossible vision. He was the greatest because he could do anything and everything on a football pitch. I remember João Saldanha the coach being asked by a Brazilian journalist who was the best goalkeeper in his squad. He said Pelé. The man could play in any position". Former Manchester United striker and member of England's 1966 FIFA World Cup-winning team Sir Bobby Charlton stated, "I sometimes feel as though football was invented for this magical player." During the 1970 World Cup, when Manchester United defender Paddy Crerand (who was part of the ITV panel) was asked, "How do you spell Pelé?", he replied, "Easy: G-O-D." Following Pelé's death, former Brazilian international and World Cup Winner Ronaldo stated that his "legacy transcends generations". Ronaldo's teammate for club and country, Roberto Carlos, also expressed gratitude towards Pele, saying that the "football world thanks you for everything you did for us". Many of such tributes were issued after Pelé's death at the age of 82. After retiring, Pelé continued to be lauded by players, coaches, journalists and others. Brazilian attacking midfielder Zico, who represented Brazil at the 1978, 1982 and 1986 FIFA World Cup, stated: "This debate about the player of the century is absurd. There's only one possible answer: Pelé. He's the greatest player of all time, and by some distance I might add". French three-time Ballon d'Or winner Michel Platini said: "There's Pelé the man, and then Pelé the player. And to play like Pelé is to play like God." Diego Maradona, joint FIFA Player of the Century, and the player Pelé is historically compared with, stated, "It's too bad we never got along, but he was an awesome player". Prolific Brazilian striker Romário, winner of the 1994 FIFA World Cup and player of the tournament, remarked: "It's only inevitable I look up to Pelé. He's like a God to us". Five-time FIFA Ballon d'Or winner Cristiano Ronaldo said, "Pelé is the greatest player in football history, and there will only be one Pelé", while José Mourinho, two-time UEFA Champions League winning manager, commented: "I think he is football. You have the real special one – Mr. Pelé." Real Madrid honorary president and former player, Alfredo Di Stéfano, opined: "The best player ever? Pelé. Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo are both great players with specific qualities, but Pelé was better". Presenting Pelé with the Laureus Lifetime Achievement Award, former South African president Nelson Mandela said, "To watch him play was to watch the delight of a child combined with the extraordinary grace of a man in full." US politician and political scientist Henry Kissinger stated: "Performance at a high level in any sport is to exceed the ordinary human scale. But Pelé's performance transcended that of the ordinary star by as much as the star exceeds ordinary performance." After a reporter asked if his fame compared to that of Jesus, Pelé joked, "There are parts of the world where Jesus Christ is not so well known." The artist Andy Warhol (who painted a portrait of Pelé) also quipped, "Pelé was one of the few who contradicted my theory: instead of 15 minutes of fame, he will have 15 centuries." David Goldblatt wrote that his emergence at the World Cup in 1958 coincided with "the explosive spread of television, which massively amplified his presence everywhere", while Barney Ronay states, "What is certain is that Pelé invented this game, the idea of individual global sporting superstardom, and in a way that is unrepeatable now." In 2000, the International Federation of Football History & Statistics (IFFHS) voted Pelé the World Player of the Century. In 1999, the International Olympic Committee elected him the Athlete of the Century and Time magazine named Pelé one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th Century. During his playing days, Pelé was for a period the highest-paid athlete in the world. Pelé's "electrifying play and penchant for spectacular goals" made him a star around the world. To take full advantage of his popularity, his teams toured internationally. During his career, he became known as "The Black Pearl" (A Pérola Negra), "The King of Football" (O Rei do Futebol), "The King Pelé" (O Rei Pelé) or simply "The King" (O Rei). In 2014, the city of Santos inaugurated the Pelé museum – Museu Pelé – which displays a 2,400 piece collection of Pelé memorabilia. Approximately $22 million was invested in the construction of the museum, housed in a 19th-century mansion. In January 2014, Pelé was awarded the first ever FIFA Ballon d'Or Prix d'Honneur as an acknowledgment from the world governing body of the sport for his contribution to world football. After changing the rules in 1995, France Football did an extensive analysis in 2015 of the players who would have won the award if it had been open for them beginning in 1956: the year the Ballon d'Or award started. Their study revealed that Pelé would have received the award a record seven times (Ballon d'or: Le nouveau palmarès). The original recipients, however, remain unchanged. In 2020, Pelé was named in the Ballon d'Or Dream Team, a greatest all-time XI. According to the RSSSF, Pelé was one of the most successful goal-scorers in the world, scoring 538 league goals, a total of 775 in 840 official games and a tally of 1,301 goals in 1,390 appearances during his professional senior career, which included friendlies and tour games. He is ranked among the leading scorers in football history in both official and total matches. After his retirement in 1977 he played eight exhibition games and scored three goals. In the lead up to the 1970 World Cup, Adidas and Puma established the "Pelé Pact", where both German sportswear companies, owned by the rival Dassler brothers, agreed not to sign a deal with Pelé, feeling that a bidding war would become too expensive. However, Puma would break the pact by signing Pelé, and in addition to paying him a percentage of Puma King boot sales, gave him $120,000 ($2.85 million in 2022) to tie his laces prior to Brazil's quarter-final against Peru to advertise their boots. With the camera panning in on the most famous athlete in the world, the Puma King Pelé boots were broadcast to a global audience, generating enormous publicity for the brand. Praised as a shrewd marketing move by Puma, the Pelé deal played a prominent role in the Dassler brothers feud, with many business experts crediting the rivalry and competition for transforming sports apparel into a multi-billion pound industry. Children By Anizia Machado Sandra (1964–2006) By Lenita Kurtz Flávia (born 1968) By Rosemeri dos Reis Cholbi Kely Cristina (born 1967) Edson (born 1970) Jennifer (born 1978) By Assíria Lemos Seixas Joshua (born 1996) Celeste (born 1996) Pelé married three times and had several affairs, fathering seven children in all. In 1966, Pelé married Rosemeri dos Reis Cholbi. They had two daughters, Kely Cristina (born 13 January 1967), who married Arthur DeLuca, and Jennifer (b. 1978), as well as one son, Edson ("Edinho", b. 27 August 1970). The couple divorced in 1982. In May 2014, Edinho was sentenced to 33 years in jail for laundering money from drug trafficking. On appeal, the sentence was reduced to 12 years and 10 months. From 1981 to 1986, Pelé was romantically linked with TV presenter Xuxa. She was 17 when they started dating. In April 1994, Pelé married psychologist and gospel singer Assíria Lemos Seixas, who gave birth on 28 September 1996 to twins Joshua and Celeste through fertility treatments. The couple divorced in 2008. Pelé had at least two more children from affairs. Sandra Machado, who was born from an affair Pelé had in 1964 with a housemaid, Anizia Machado, fought for years to be acknowledged by Pelé, who refused to submit to DNA tests. Pelé finally relented after a court-ordered DNA test proved she was his daughter. Sandra Machado died of cancer in 2006. At the age of 73, Pelé announced his intention to marry 41-year-old Marcia Aoki, a Japanese-Brazilian importer of medical equipment from Penápolis, São Paulo, whom he had been dating since 2010. They first met in the mid-1980s in New York, before meeting again in 2008. They married in July 2016. In January 1995, he was appointed by Fernando Cardoso as minister of sports. During his tenure, multiple reforms against corruption in state football associations were presented. He resigned from the post on 30 April 1998. During the 2013 protests in Brazil, Pelé asked for people to put aside the demonstrations and support the Brazil national team. On 1 June 2022, Pelé published an open letter to the President of Russia Vladimir Putin on his Instagram account, in which he made a public plea to stop the "evil" and "unjustified" Russian invasion of Ukraine. A Catholic, Pelé donated a signed jersey to Pope Francis. Accompanied by a signed football from Ronaldo Nazario, it is located in one of the Vatican Museums. In 1977, Brazilian media reported that Pelé had his right kidney removed. In November 2012, Pelé underwent a successful hip operation. In December 2017, Pelé appeared in a wheelchair at the 2018 World Cup draw in Moscow where he was pictured with President Vladimir Putin and Argentine footballer Diego Maradona. A month later, he collapsed from exhaustion and was taken to hospital. In 2019, after a hospitalisation because of a urinary tract infection, Pelé underwent surgery to remove kidney stones. In February 2020, his son Edinho reported that Pelé was unable to walk independently and reluctant to leave home, ascribing his condition to a lack of rehabilitation following his hip operation. In September 2021, Pelé had surgery to remove a tumour on the right side of his colon. Although his eldest daughter Kely stated he was "doing well", he was reportedly readmitted to intensive care a few days later, before finally being released on 30 September 2021 to begin chemotherapy. In November 2022, ESPN Brasil reported that Pelé had been taken to hospital with "general swelling", along with cardiac issues and concerns that his chemotherapy treatment was not having the expected effect; his daughter Kely stated there was "no emergency". In 1994, Pelé was appointed a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador. In 1995, Brazilian president Fernando Henrique Cardoso appointed Pelé to the position of extraordinary minister for sport. During this time he proposed legislation to reduce corruption in Brazilian football, which became known as the "Pelé law". Cardoso eliminated the post of sports minister in 1998. In 2001, Pelé was accused of involvement in a corruption scandal that stole $700,000 from UNICEF. It was claimed that money given to Pelé's company for a benefit match was not returned after it was cancelled, although nothing was proven, and it was denied by UNICEF. In 1997, he received an honorary knighthood from Queen Elizabeth II at a ceremony in Buckingham Palace. Pelé also helped inaugurate the 2006 FIFA World Cup, alongside supermodel Claudia Schiffer. In 1993, Pelé publicly accused the Brazilian football administrator Ricardo Teixeira of corruption after Pelé's television company was rejected in a contest for the Brazilian domestic rights to the 1994 World Cup. Pelé's accusations led to an eight-year feud between the pair. As a consequence of the affair, the President of FIFA, João Havelange, Teixeira's father-in-law, banned Pelé from the draw for the 1994 FIFA World Cup in Las Vegas. Criticisms over the ban were perceived to have damaged Havelange's chances of re-election as FIFA's president in 1994. In 1976, Pelé was on a Pepsi-sponsored trip in Lagos, Nigeria, when the military attempted a coup. Pelé was trapped in a hotel together with Arthur Ashe and other tennis pros, who were participating in the interrupted 1976 Lagos WCT tournament. Pelé and his crew eventually left the hotel to stay at the residence of Brazil's ambassador as they could not leave the country for a couple of days. Later the airport was opened and Pelé left the country disguised as a pilot. Pelé published several autobiographies, starred in documentary films, and composed musical pieces, including Sérgio Mendes' soundtrack for the film Pelé directed by François Reichenbach in 1977. He appeared in the 1981 film Escape to Victory, about a World War II-era football match between Allied prisoners of war and a German team. Pelé starred alongside other footballers of the 1960s and 1970s, with actors Michael Caine and Sylvester Stallone. In 1969, Pelé starred in a telenovela called Os Estranhos, about first contact with aliens. It was created to drum up interest in the Apollo missions. In 2001, he had a cameo role in the football satire film Mike Bassett: England Manager. Pelé was asked to participate in the 2006 ESPN documentary film Once in a Lifetime: The Extraordinary Story of the New York Cosmos, but declined when the producers refused to pay his requested $100,000 fee. Pelé appeared at the 2006 World Economic Forum in Davos, and spoke on the subject titled, "Can a Ball Change the World: The Role of Sports in Development". In November 2007, Pelé was in Sheffield, England, to mark the 150th anniversary of the world's oldest football club, Sheffield F.C. Pelé was the guest of honour at Sheffield's anniversary match against Inter Milan at Bramall Lane. As part of his visit, Pelé opened an exhibition which included the first public showing in 40 years of the original hand-written rules of football. Pelé scouted for Premier League club Fulham in 2002. He made the draw for the qualification groups for the 2006 FIFA World Cup finals. On 1 August 2010, Pelé was introduced as the honorary president of a revived New York Cosmos, aiming to field a team in Major League Soccer. In August 2011, ESPN reported that Santos was considering bringing him out of retirement for a cameo role in the 2011 FIFA Club World Cup, although this turned out to be false. The most notable area of Pelé's life since football was his ambassadorial work. In 1992, he was appointed a UN ambassador for ecology and the environment. He was also awarded Brazil's gold medal for outstanding services to the sport in 1995. In 2012, Pelé was awarded an honorary degree from the University of Edinburgh for "significant contribution to humanitarian and environmental causes, as well as his sporting achievements". In 2009, Pelé assisted the Rio de Janeiro bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics. In July 2009, he spearheaded the Rio 2016 presentation to the Association of National Olympic Committees of Africa General Assembly in Abuja, Nigeria. On 12 August 2012, Pelé was an attendee at the 2012 Olympic hunger summit hosted by British prime minister David Cameron at 10 Downing Street, London, part of a series of international efforts which have sought to respond to the return of hunger as a high-profile global issue. Later on the same day, Pelé appeared at the closing ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, following the handover section to the next host city for the 2016 Summer Olympics, Rio de Janeiro. In March 2016, Pelé filed a lawsuit against Samsung Electronics in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois seeking US$30 million in damages claiming violations under the Lanham Act for false endorsement and a state law claim for violation of his right of publicity. The suit alleged that at one point, Samsung and Pelé came close to entering into a licensing agreement for Pelé to appear in a Samsung advertising campaign, but Samsung abruptly pulled out of the negotiations. The October 2015 Samsung ad in question included a partial face shot of a man who allegedly "very closely resembles" Pelé and also a superimposed high-definition television screen next to the image of the man featuring a "modified bicycle or scissors-kick", often used by Pelé. The case was settled out-of-court several years later. In addition to his ambassadorial work, Pelé supported various charitable causes, such as Action for Brazil's Children, Gols Pela Vida, SOS Children's Villages, The Littlest Lamb, Prince's Rainforests Project and many more. In 2016, Pelé auctioned more than 1600 items from a collection he accumulated over decades and raised £3.6 million for charity. In 2018, Pelé founded his charitable organisation, the Pelé Foundation, which endeavours to empower impoverished and disenfranchised children from around the globe. Wikinews has related news: "National treasure": Former Brazilian footballer Pelé dies at age 82 In 2021, Pelé was diagnosed with colon cancer. He underwent surgery the same month, and afterwards was treated with several rounds of chemotherapy. In early 2022, metastasis were detected in the intestine, lung and liver. On 29 November, he was admitted to the Albert Einstein Israelite Hospital in São Paulo due to a respiratory infection after he contracted COVID-19 and for reassessment of the treatment of his colon cancer. On 3 December 2022, it was reported that Pelé had become unresponsive to chemotherapy and that it was replaced with palliative care. On 21 December 2022, the Albert Einstein Israelite Hospital, where Pelé was being treated, stated that his tumour had advanced and he required "greater care related to renal and cardiac dysfunctions". Therefore, he was not allowed to spend Christmas at home, as his family had wanted. Pelé died on 29 December 2022, at 3:27 pm, at the age of 82, due to multiple organ failure, a complication of colon cancer. Pelé's death certificate stated that he had died of kidney failure, heart failure, bronchopneumonia and colon adenocarcinoma. He was survived by his 100-year-old mother, Celeste, who, given her advanced age, did not understand her son's death; Pelé's sister Maria Lucia do Nascimento described their mother as "in her own little world". "He had a magnetic presence and, when you were with him, the rest of the world stopped. Today, the whole world mourns the loss of Pelé; the greatest footballer of all time." —FIFA President, Gianni Infantino Tributes were paid by current players, including Neymar, Cristiano Ronaldo, Kylian Mbappé and Lionel Messi, along with other major sporting figures, celebrities, and world leaders. The outgoing Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, declared a three-day period of national mourning. The national flags of the 211 member associations of FIFA were flown at half-mast at FIFA headquarters in Zürich. Landmarks and stadiums lit up in honour of Pelé included the Christ the Redeemer statue and Maracanã Stadium in Rio de Janeiro, the headquarters of CONMEBOL in Paraguay and Wembley Stadium in London. There was applause and a minute's silence at matches in honour of Pelé. Pelé's funeral, which involved his body being publicly displayed in an open coffin which was draped with the flags of Brazil and Santos FC, began at Vila Belmiro stadium in Santos on 2 January 2023. Thousands of fans flooded the streets to attend the first day of the funeral service, with some in attendance claiming that they had to wait three hours in line. The public wake would continue to 3 January, and saw more than 230,000 people in attendance. Many in attendance were wearing the yellow and green No. 10 Brazilian jerseys and the black and white Santos football club jersey, which Pelé wore during his career. Brazil television channels suspended normal broadcasting to cover the funeral procession. Pelé's wife Marcia Aoki, his son Edinho, FIFA president Gianni Infantino, CONMEBOL president Alejandro Domínguez and president of the Brazilian Football Confederation Ednaldo Rodrigues were among those in attendance. It would continue on 3 January 2023. Newly sworn in Brazilian president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva was also among those who attended the wake. After the funeral procession, Pelé was buried at the Memorial Necrópole Ecumênica. Kigali Pelé Stadium in Rwanda was renamed for him in March 2023 by Rwandan president Paul Kagame and FIFA president Gianni Infantino as part of the 73rd FIFA Congress. On 26 April 2023, the nickname pelé became synonymous with "exceptional, incomparable, unique" in Michaelis Portuguese-language dictionary after a campaign with 125,000 signatories. Pelé's goalscoring record is often reported by FIFA as being 1,281 goals in 1,363 games. This figure includes goals scored by Pelé in friendly club matches, including international tours Pelé completed with Santos and the New York Cosmos, and a few games Pelé played in for the Brazilian armed forces teams during his national service in Brazil and the state team of São Paulo who competed for the Brazilian Championship of States Teams (Campeonato Brasileiro de Seleções Estaduais). He was listed in the Guinness World Records for most career goals scored in football. In 2000, IFFHS declared Pelé as the "World's Best and successful Top Division Goal Scorer of all time" with 541 goals in 560 games and honoured him with a trophy. The tables below record every goal Pelé scored in official club competitions for Santos FC and all matches and goals for the New York Cosmos. * Indicates that the number was deduced from the list of rsssf.com and this list of Pelé games. With 77 goals in 92 official appearances, Pelé is the second highest goalscorer of the Brazil national football team. He scored twelve goals and is credited with ten assists in fourteen World Cup appearances, including four goals and seven assists in 1970. Source: São Paulo state team Campeonato Brasileiro de Seleções Estaduais: 1959 Santos Campeonato Brasileiro Série A: 1961, 1962, 1963, 1964, 1965, 1968 Copa Libertadores: 1962, 1963 Intercontinental Cup: 1962, 1963 Intercontinental Supercup: 1968 Campeonato Paulista: 1958, 1960, 1961, 1962, 1964, 1965, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1973 Torneio Rio-São Paulo: 1959, 1963, 1964, 1966 New York Cosmos North American Soccer League, Soccer Bowl: 1977 North American Soccer League, Atlantic Conference Championship: 1977 Brazil FIFA World Cup: 1958, 1962, 1970 Taça do Atlântico: 1960 Roca Cup: 1957, 1963 Taça Oswaldo Cruz: 1958, 1962, 1968 Copa Bernardo O'Higgins: 1959 Individual In December 2000, Pelé and Maradona shared the prize of FIFA Player of the Century by FIFA. The award was originally intended to be based upon votes in a web poll, but after it became apparent that it favoured Diego Maradona after a reported cyber-blitz by Maradona fans, FIFA then appointed a "Family of Football" committee of FIFA members to decide the winner of the award together with the votes of the readers of the FIFA magazine. The committee chose Pelé. Since Maradona was winning the Internet poll, however, it was decided he and Pelé should share the award. Campeonato Paulista Top Scorer: 1957, 1958, 1959, 1960, 1961, 1962, 1963, 1964, 1965, 1969, 1973 FIFA World Cup Best Young Player: 1958 FIFA World Cup Silver Ball: 1958 France Football's Ballon d'Or: 1958, 1959, 1960, 1961, 1963, 1964, 1970 – Le nouveau palmarès (the new winners) South American Championship Best Player: 1959 South American Championship Top Scorer: 1959 Copa Bernardo O'Higgins Top Scorer: 1959 (shared with Quarentinha) Gol de Placa: 1961 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A Top Scorer: 1961, 1963, 1964 Intercontinental Cup Top Scorer: 1962, 1963 Torneio Rio-São Paulo Top Scorer: 1963 Copa Libertadores Top Scorer: 1965 BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year: 1970 Bola de Prata: 1970 FIFA World Cup Golden Ball (Best Player): 1970 South American Footballer of the Year: 1973 Included in the North American Soccer League (NASL) All-Star team: 1975, 1976, 1977 NASL Top Assist Provider: 1976 NASL Most Valuable Player: 1976 Number 10 retired by the New York Cosmos as a recognition to his contribution to the club: 1977 Elected Citizen of the World, by the United Nations: 1977 International Peace Award: 1978 Sports Champion of the Century, by L'Équipe: 1981 FIFA Order of Merit: 1984 Inducted into the American National Soccer Hall of Fame: 1992 Elected Goodwill Ambassador, by UNESCO: 1993 Winner of France Football's World Cup Top-100 1930–1990: 1994 Marca Leyenda: 1997 World Team of the 20th Century: 1998 Football Player of the Century, elected by France Football's Ballon d'Or Winners: 1999 TIME: One of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th century: 1999 Greatest Player of the 20th Century, by World Soccer: 1999 Athlete of the Century, by Reuters News Agency: 1999 Athlete of the Century, elected by International Olympic Committee: 1999 World Player of the Century, by the IFFHS: 2000 South American player of the century, by the IFFHS: 2000 FIFA Player of the Century: 2000 Laureus Lifetime Achievement Award: 2000 FIFA Centennial Award: 2004 FIFA 100 Greatest Living Footballers: 2004 BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award: 2005 Elected best Brazilian player of the century, by the IFFHS: 2006 FIFA Presidential Award: 2007 Greatest football player to have ever played the game, by Golden Foot: 2012 FIFA Ballon d'Or Prix d'Honneur: 2013 World Soccer Greatest XI of All Time: 2013 Legends of Football Award: 2013 South America's Best Player in History, by L'Équipe: 2015 Inspiration Award, by GQ: 2017 Global Citizen Award, by the World Economic Forum: 2018 FWA Tribute Award: 2018 Ballon d'Or Dream Team: 2020 IFFHS All-time Men's Dream Team: 2021 IFFHS South America Men's Team of All Time: 2021 Player of History Award: 2022 FIFA Best Special Award: 2022 Orders Knight of the Order of Rio Branco: 1967 Elected Commander of the Order of Rio Branco after scoring the thousandth goal: 1969 Officer of the Order of Ouissam Alaouite of the Kingdom of Morocco: 1976 Awarded with the Order of Champions, by the Organization of Catholic Youth in the USA: 1978 Awarded the FIFA Order as a tribute to his 80 years as a sports institution: 1984 Awarded with the Order of Merit of South America, by CONMEBOL: 1984 He was awarded the National Order of Merit, by the government of Brazil: 1991 Awarded with the Cross of the Order of the Republic of Hungary: 1994 Awarded the Order of Military Merit: 1995 Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (honorary knighthood): 1997 Awarded with the Order of Cultural Merit, by the government of Brazil: 2004 Olympic Order, by the International Olympic Committee: 2016 Records Highest goals-per-game ratio for Brazil national football team: 0.84 Highest goals-per-game ratio of any South American top international scorer: 0.84 Highest goals-per-game ratio of any leading scorer in the Intercontinental Cup: 2.33 Most goals in the Intercontinental Cup: 7 Most goals for Santos: 643 (in 659 competitive games) Most goals for Santos: 1091 (including friendlies) Most appearances for Santos: 1116 Most goals within a single Brazilian top-flight league season: 58 Most goals scored in a single Campeonato Paulista season: 58 (in 38 competitive games,1958) Most goals scored in a single Campeonato Paulista match: 8 (1964) Most goals scored in Campeonato Paulista history: 466 Most seasons as Campeonato Paulista Top Scorer: 11 Most consecutive seasons as Campeonato Paulista Top Scorer: 9 (1957–1965) Most goals in a calendar year (including friendlies, recognised by FIFA): 127 (1959) RSSSF record for most top level goals scored in one season (including friendlies): 120 (1959) RSSSF record for most seasons with over 100 top level goals scored (including friendlies): 3 (1959, 1961, 1965) RSSSF record for most goals scored before the age of 30: 675 RSSSF record for most top level career goals (including friendlies): 1,274 Guinness World Record for most career goals in world football (including friendlies): 1,283 (in 1,363 games) IFFHS record for most top division league goals: 604 IFFHS record for most top level domestic goals: 659 Guinness World Record for most hat-tricks in world football: 92 Most hat-tricks for Brazil: 7 Most FIFA World Cup winners' medals: 3 (1958, 1962, 1970) Youngest winner of a FIFA World Cup: aged 17 years and 249 days (1958) Youngest goalscorer in a FIFA World Cup: aged 17 years and 239 days (for Brazil vs Wales, 1958) Youngest player to score twice in a FIFA World Cup semi-final: aged 17 years and 244 days (for Brazil vs France, 1958) Youngest player to score a hat-trick in a FIFA World Cup: aged 17 years and 244 days (for Brazil vs France, 1958) Youngest player to play in a FIFA World Cup Final: aged 17 years and 249 days (1958) Youngest goalscorer in a FIFA World Cup Final: aged 17 years and 249 days (for Brazil vs Sweden, 1958) Youngest player to score twice in a FIFA World Cup Final: aged 17 years and 249 days (for Brazil vs Sweden, 1958) Youngest player to play for Brazil in a FIFA World Cup: aged 17 years and 234 days Youngest player to start a knockout match at a FIFA World Cup Youngest player to reach five FIFA World Cup knockout stage goals Youngest player to debut for Brazil national football team: aged 16 years and 259 days (Brazil vs Argentina, 1957) Youngest goalscorer for Brazil national football team: aged 16 years and 259 days (Brazil vs Argentina, 1957) Youngest Top Scorer in the Campeonato Paulista First player to score in three successive FIFA World Cups First teenager to score in a FIFA World Cup Final One of only five players to have scored in four different FIFA World Cup tournaments One of only five players to have scored in two different FIFA World Cup Finals Scored in two FIFA World Cup Finals for winning teams (shared with Vavá) Most assists provided in FIFA World Cup history: 10 (1958–1970) Most assists provided in a single FIFA World Cup tournament: 6 (1970) Most assists provided in FIFA World Cup Final matches: 3 (1 in 1958 and 2 in 1970) Most assists provided in FIFA World Cup knockout phase: 6 (shared with Messi) Most goals from open play in FIFA World Cup Final matches: 3 (2 in 1958 and 1 in 1970) (shared with Vavá, Geoff Hurst and Zinedine Zidane) Most FIFA World Cup goal involvements for Brazil Most goals scored in the Copa Bernardo O'Higgins: 3 (shared with Quarentinha) Only player to reach 25 international goals as a teenager Only player to score in a FIFA World Cup before turning 18 Only player to score a hat-trick in a FIFA World cup before turning 18 Only player to have scored a hat-trick in the Intercontinental Cup Only player to have scored a hat-trick in the Copa Bernardo O'Higgins Association football portal Brazil portal Biography portal Sports portal Football portal List of Brazil national football team hat-tricks List of international goals scored by Pelé List of international hat-tricks scored by Pelé List of men's footballers with 500 or more goals List of men's footballers with 50 or more international goals Pelé runaround move Torcida Jovem of Santos FC School of Samba According to Pelé, his birth certificate listed 21 October 1940 incorrectly. Pelé presumed that it was an insult since the word had no meaning in Portuguese. He discovered in the 2000s that the word meant "miracle" in Hebrew. The mark was surpassed by Northern Ireland's Norman Whiteside in the 1982 FIFA World Cup. He scored his first World Cup goal against Wales in the quarter-finals, the only goal of the match, to help Brazil advance to the semi-finals while becoming the youngest ever World Cup goalscorer at 17 years and 239 days. Pelé would stop in the middle of a run-up to a penalty kick before shooting the ball; goalkeepers complained that this gave strikers an unfair advantage, however, and in the 1970s, FIFA banned this move from competitions. Soccer Europe compiled this list from RSSSF. Statistics from 1957 to 1974 for the Taça de Prata, Taça Brasil and Copa Libertadores were taken from Soccer Europe website. Soccer Europe lists RSSSF, but do not give a season-by-season breakdown. In 1957, the Paulista Championship was divided in two phases: Blue Series and White Series. In the first, Pelé scored 19 goals in 14 games, and in the Blue Series, scored 17 goals in 15 games. This number was inferred from a Santos fixture list from rsssf.com and this list of games Pelé played. Intercontinental Super Cup Statistics from 1957 to 1974 for the Taça de Prata, Taça Brasil and Copa Libertadores were taken from Soccer Europe website. Soccer Europe lists RSSSF, but do not give a season-by-season breakdown. RSSSF recognize as league goals those scored in NASL, the post season play-offs, Campeonato Paulista goals and the original Campeonato Brazileiro goals (1971–1974). IFFHS has made the same validation in the past. The 1973 Paulista was held jointly with Portuguesa. The 1964 Torneio Rio-São Paulo was held jointly with Botafogo. "Pelé, who rose from a Brazilian slum to become the world's greatest soccer player, dies at 82". Los Angeles Times. 29 December 2022. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "FIFA: Pele, the greatest of them all". FIFA. 28 June 2012. Archived from the original on 9 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. Luhn, Michele (29 December 2022). "Pelé, Brazilian soccer star and the only player to win the World Cup three times, dies at age 82". CNBC. Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2023. "Most career goals (football)". Guinness World Records. 7 September 1956. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 21 July 2017. "Pelé (Brazilian Athlete)". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 11 July 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2017. Ronay, Barney (1 January 2021). "Pelé's revolutionary status must survive numbers game against Lionel Messi". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 3 February 2021. Ben Green (30 December 2022). "Pele's legendary career told in numbers: Just how good was Brazil's emblematic forward?". squawka.com. Pelé & Fish 1977, p. 18–19. "Morreu Zoca, o escudeiro do Rei" [Zoca has died, the King's squire]. santosfc.com.br (in Portuguese). 26 March 2020. Archived from the original on 2 February 2023. Retrieved 2 February 2023. Pelé 2008, p. 14. Narcía, Eva. "Un siglo, diez historias" (in Spanish). BBC World Service. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. Retrieved 21 June 2010. "From Edson to Pelé: my changing identity". The Guardian. London. 12 May 2006. Archived from the original on 14 November 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2006. Winterman, Denise (4 January 2006). "Taking the Pelé". BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 November 2008. Retrieved 11 January 2023. "Pelé". Biography.com, via A&E Television Networks. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 18 July 2017. Heizer 1997, p. 173. Magill 1999, p. 2950. "Pele Speaks of Benefits of Futebol de Salão". International Confederation of Futebol de Salão. 24 May 2006. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Freedman 2014, p. 47. Massarela, Louis (7 September 2016). "Exclusive interview: Pele on his Santos years". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 22 June 2021. Retrieved 28 July 2017. Marcus 1976, p. 20. "Pele helps Brazil to World Cup title". History. Archived from the original on 30 October 2020. Retrieved 18 July 2017. Da Mata, Alessandro (26 October 2007). "Mesário da estréia de Pelé lembra atrapalhada" (in Portuguese). Sâo Paulo: LANCE!. Archived from the original on 14 May 2008. "Pelé, auguri a Ronaldo. E rivela: "Sono stato vicino alla Juve"". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 18 August 2018. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 30 August 2018. Cecere, Nicola (26 May 2016). "Moratti: "Pelé era dell'Inter, ma il presidente del Santos cambiò idea..."" [Moratti: "Pelé was Inter's, but the president of Santos changed his mind ..."]. La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 30 August 2018. Chilet, Vicent (23 December 2019). "Cuando el Valencia pudo haber fichado a Pelé". elperiodico (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 24 December 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. "El Valencia llegó a tener un acuerdo para fichar a Pelé". El Español (in Spanish). 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 24 December 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. Chelala, Cesar (2014). "Pele, Maradona and Messi: soccer's holy trinity". The Japan Times. Archived from the original on 29 September 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2017. "Campeonato Paulista: Artilheiros da história – 2". Brasil em Folhas (in Portuguese). 17 January 2008. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 18 August 2010. Unzelte, Celso; Varanda, Pedro; Cammarota, Giuseppe; Barreto Berwanger, Alexandre Magno (2011). "Fichas Técnicas De Jogos Que Decidiram O Torneio Rio-Sâo Paulo" (in Portuguese). Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 23 April 2011. Retrieved 18 August 2010. Matta, Fernando; Varanda, Pedro; Barreto Berwanger, Alexandre Magno; Unzelte, Celso; Leme de Arruda, Marcelo (2009). "Torneio Rio-São Paulo 1960" (in Portuguese). Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 16 December 2009. "Santos revive spirit of Pele". BBC Sport. 16 February 2003. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "What they said about Pele". FIFA. 16 Jul 2019. Dunmore 2015, p. 290. Pierrend, José Luis; Beuker, John; Ciullini, Pablo; Gorgazzi, Osvaldo. "Copa Libertadores de América 1962". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 27 October 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2016. "Intercontinental Cups 1962 and 1963". FIFA. 15 January 2015 "Extraordinary Pele crowns Santos in Lisbon". FIFA. 11 October 2012. Archived from the original on 14 November 2012. Retrieved 22 October 2012. Vickery, Tim (23 December 2009). "Will South Africa 2010 produce a new Pele?". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "Pele receives tribute for 1959 goal". The Times. Malta. 31 August 2006. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2017. "Remembering Pele's gol de placa". FIFA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2015. Retrieved 10 May 2011. Bellos 2003, p. 244. "1963: With an amazing Pele, Brazil's Santos wins their second Copa Libertadores Tournament". CONMEBOL. 12 September 2015. Archived from the original on 6 November 2018. Retrieved 17 January 2019. Bassorelli, Gerardo. "En los años sesenta, Peñarol y Santos protagonizaron inolvidables batallas por la Libertadores, generando una rivalidad que transformó a este duelo en el primer clásico que tuvo la Copa". LaRed21. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2017. Andrés, Juan Pablo; Ballesteros, Frank; Di Maggio, Robert. "Copa Libertadores – Topscorers". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 31 October 2015. Trusdell, Brian (2014). Pelé : Soccer Star & Ambassador. ABDO. p. 39. "Why Pele's 1000th goal still matters, 50 years on". Sportstar. 19 November 2019. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "Pele: Recalling the Moments That Defined His Career". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 26 September 2021. Retrieved 15 August 2020. Santos – Pelé edges Eusébio as Santos defend title FIFA. 23 April 2007. Retrieved 5 May 2011 Apple, R. W. Jr. (4 July 1975). "Pele to Play Soccer Here for $7-Million". The New York Times. p. A1. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 5 August 2019. "Lionel Messi passes Pele for most goals with one club (VIDEO)". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 5 January 2021. Retrieved 23 December 2020. "Lionel Messi breaks Pelé's record for goals at a single club". The Guardian. 23 December 2020. Archived from the original on 14 October 2022. Retrieved 23 December 2020. "Loyal to Santos, Pele toured and scored in Europe". The Globe and Mail. 30 December 2022. Retrieved 17 March 2024. Alaa Abdel-Ghani (3 January 2023). "When Pelé played in Egypt". كمال قبيسي (30 December 2022). "حين عشق بيليه ممثلة مصرية وطلب منها الزواج في الكويت". "Pele and the Arab World". Kuwait Moments. Retrieved 17 March 2024. "قصة حب البرازيلى بيليه لـ زبيدة ثروت وإعجابه بها من أول نظرة فى الكويت". اليوم السابع. 13 December 2021. Retrieved 17 March 2024. "A big surprise... Pele's love story with this late Arab artist? (photo)". dearborn.org. Retrieved 17 March 2024. "Get to Know about Pelé-Zubaida Tharwat Love Story | Sada Elbalad". see.news. Retrieved 17 March 2024. Newsham, Gavin (9 June 2005). "When Pele and Cosmos were kings". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2020. Lewis, Michael (30 September 2017). "How Pelé lit up soccer in America and left a legacy fit for a king". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 14 August 2020. Yaisinis, Alex (21 June 1975). "Swarming Fans Injure Pele". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 5 August 2019. Lewis, Michael (2 June 2015). "40 years on: how New York Cosmos lured Pelé to a football wasteland". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 November 2022. Retrieved 5 August 2019. "Football and Politics in the Shadow of the Cedars, 2000–2015". mepc.org. Middle East Policy Council. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 18 January 2019. "Lebanon's national teams fly above entrenched sectarianism among supporters". The National. 8 January 2019. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 18 January 2019. Dunmore 2011, p. 198. Gustkey, Earl (28 August 1999). "Pele's Contributions Gave Soccer a Foothold". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 17 September 2021. Freedman 2014, p. 165. "'Love! Love! Love!' Cries Pele to 75,646 in Farewell". The New York Times. 2 October 1977. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2020. "Seven the number for Pele". FIFA. 2007. Archived from the original on 18 December 2014. Retrieved 5 May 2011. Williams, Bob (28 October 2008). "Top 10: Young sporting champions". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2011. Lang, Jack (7 July 2017). "60 years ago today, Pele scored his first Brazil goal and began a career that would change football". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 29 July 2018. Morrison, Neil; Gandini, Luca; Villante, Eric. "Oldest and Youngest Players and Goal-scorers in International Football". Rec. Sport. Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 26 July 2022. Retrieved 3 February 2023. "Simply the best ever". ABC News. 25 April 2002. Archived from the original on 2 January 2003. "Copa 1958". Terra Networks (in Portuguese). 2006. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 24 October 2010. Gault, Matt (9 July 2015). "Norman Whiteside: world beater at 17, retired by 26". These Football Times. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2017. Hawkes, Will (26 May 2010). "Flashback No 6. Sweden 1958: Pele's genius propels Brazil to first title". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. FIFA World Cup Goal of the Century FIFA. 30 May 2002. Retrieved 5 May 2011 "The King of football". FIFA. 2015. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016. Retrieved 21 January 2016. Pelé (13 May 2006). "How a teenager took the world by wizardry". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 September 2014. Retrieved 16 July 2017. 1958 FIFA World Cup Sweden – Awards FIFA. Retrieved 6 May 2011 Spencer, Jamie (7 September 2015). "The Fascinating Stories Behind 13 Famous Shirt Numbers". 90 Min. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2017. Tabeira, Martín (19 July 2007). "The Copa América Archive – Trivia". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 27 July 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2014. Tabeira, Martín (2009). "Southamerican Championship 1959 (1st Tournament)". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 21 November 2022. Retrieved 3 February 2023. "PELE – International Football Hall of Fame". ifhof.com. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 16 August 2016. Kunti, Samindra (23 October 2015). "A Look Back at Pelé's Legendary Takedown of Mexico's Defense at the 1962 World Cup". Remezcla. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 29 July 2017. Downie, Andrew (6 July 2014). "Brazilians look to Pele and 1962 for Cup-winning omen". Reuters. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2017. Moore, Glenn (3 June 2006). "Pele: The Greatest". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "Pele and Greaves to get World Cup winners medals". The Guardian. 25 November 2007. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. "1966 FIFA World Cup England: Group 3". FIFA. Retrieved 16 January 2015 Burnton, Simon (24 July 2016). "Why not everyone remembers the 1966 World Cup as fondly as England". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 17 July 2019. Collins, Nick (9 July 2010). "World Cup final: 10 top World Cup refereeing errors". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2011. "1966 FIFA World Cup Portugal v Brazil – Report". FIFA. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. Mamrud, Roberto. "Edson Arantes do Nascimento "Pelé" – Goals in International matches". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 1 May 2011. Bell, Jack (11 July 2007). "1970 Brazilian Soccer Team Voted Best Ever". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 November 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2011. Joseph, Paul (9 April 2008). "The boys from Brazil: On the trail of football's dream team". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2011. Baxter, Kevin (10 May 2014). "World Cup: The 10 best teams of all time". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 7 September 2023. Retrieved 7 September 2023. 1. Brazil 1970: The 1970 team that won the third of Brazil's record five World Cups is widely considered the best. "Mexico in thrall to Brazilians' beautiful game". FIFA. Archived from the original on 27 April 2015. Retrieved 17 July 2017. "Pele and 1970: How the greatest player of all time cemented his legend". BBC. Archived from the original on 5 October 2023. Retrieved 9 September 2023. Hughes, Rob (29 December 1999). "The Greatest? For Century, Pele Eclipses Muhammad Ali". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2011. Hattenstone, Simon (30 June 2003). "And God created Pelé". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 8 October 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "Jairzinho and Banks reunited". BBC. 2 August 2002. Archived from the original on 17 October 2002. Retrieved 28 July 2022. Joyce, Stephen (12 January 2010). "Mexico 1970: Brazilians show all how beautiful game should be played". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 10 February 2010. "'Born To Play Football': Top Quotes About Brazil Legend Pele". Channels Television. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 30 October 2022. "World Championship – Jules Rimet Cup 1970 Final". FIFA. Retrieved 17 December 2014 "Coca-Cola Memorable Celebrations 1: Pele's Iconic Leap of Joy After Scoring Brazil's Century Goal". Goal. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 8 October 2018. Benson, Andrew (2 June 2006) "The perfect goal" Archived 30 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine. BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 May 2011. "Brazil's heroes of 1970 relive their days of glory". FIFA. 10 June 2000. Archived from the original on 2 December 2008. Retrieved 6 May 2011. Kirby, Gentry (2003). "Pele, King of Futbol". ESPN. Archived from the original on 5 June 2016. Retrieved 21 January 2016. "Spain's 2010 conquerors in numbers". FIFA. 22 August 2017. Archived from the original on 7 June 2018. Retrieved 18 May 2020. Stevenson, Jonathan (20 January 2008). "Remembering the genius of Garrincha". BBC. Archived from the original on 28 December 2010. Retrieved 8 December 2013. "Neymar passes Pele to become Brazil's record goalscorer". Raidió Teilifís Éireann. Archived from the original on 10 September 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. "Neymar overtakes Pele as Brazil's leading male goalscorer: 'I never imagined reaching this record'". TNT Sports. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. "The World Cup will show why football is still a beautiful game". The Telegraph. No. 12 June 2014. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Malley, Frank (23 December 1999). "Pele, the perfect player". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Bate, Adam (19 March 2015). "Messi? Ronaldo? Pele? Maradona? Who is the greatest of all-time?". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2017. Massarella, Louis (5 November 2015). "Pele or Puskas? Maradona or Messi? Just who is the best No.10 of all-time?". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 11 February 2016. Miller, David (12 December 2000). "Maradona's genius cannot eclipse Brazilian master". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2017. Adams, Tom (9 November 2015). "Mesut Ozil's assists at Arsenal make a compelling case for player of the year". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 6 November 2018. Retrieved 27 February 2017. "Pelé and Maradona – two very different number tens". FIFA. 25 January 2001. Archived from the original on 10 July 2015. Retrieved 14 October 2012. Pelé 2008, p. 41. Pastorin, Darwin. "PELE (Edson Arantes do Nascimento)" (in Italian). Treccani: Enciclopedia dello Sport (2002). Archived from the original on 18 December 2018. Retrieved 27 February 2017. Marino, Giovanni (21 April 2010). "La vita mancina di Mario Corso "Io, tra Herrera, Pelè e Berselli"". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2017. Pelé 2008, p. 112. "Pele Player Profile". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2017. Radogna, Fiorenzo (1 October 2017). "40 anni fa l'addio al calcio di Pelé: la storia di O Rei, tre volte campione del mondo". Il Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 24 July 2021. Retrieved 10 December 2018. Miller, Nick (15 June 2015). "Pele Top 10: World Cup glory, with Bobby Moore and goals, goals goals". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2017. Crosetti, Maurizio (26 May 2014). "Palleggio volante ed esterno destro il mondo conobbe il bambino Pelé". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2017. "A Shot That Captured the Bigger Meaning in Sports". The New York Times. 15 September 2010. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2018. Longhi, Lorenzo (18 October 2010). "Il mastino Burgnich: "Il mio Pelé, il migliore di tutti"" (in Italian). Sky Italia. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 28 June 2018. Fiori, Stefano (27 June 2018). "Mondiali, la maledizione dei campioni in carica continua" (in Italian). foxsports.it. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 28 June 2018. Motisi, Domenico (5 October 2017). "Da Pelé a Grosso, i 20 calciatori più determinanti e decisivi ai Mondiali" (in Italian). Sky Italia. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 28 June 2018. "ESPN.com – ENDOFCENTURY – Wide World of Sports athlete of the century". ESPN. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 4 June 2020. "Pele tops World Cup legends poll". BBC News. 12 June 2006. Archived from the original on 26 March 2019. Retrieved 21 January 2016. "The Best of the Best". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 26 January 2010. Various sources: Le Miere, Jason (7 October 2014). "Top 50 Greatest Footballers Of All-Time – Pelé, Maradona, Messi And Ronaldo Included In The Best Soccer Players Ever List". International Business Times. Archived from the original on 21 January 2022. Retrieved 9 December 2022. Knight, Rob (27 May 2018). "Pelé has been voted the greatest footballer of all time". The Independent. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 9 December 2022. Mahmood, Zahid (12 June 2018). "Vincent Kompany: 'Pele is the greatest player of all time'". CNN. Archived from the original on 9 December 2022. Retrieved 9 December 2022. Rostance, Tom (24 October 2020). "Pele at 80: Where does he rank among the GOATs?". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 9 December 2022. Retrieved 9 December 2022. "Wenger's 'idol' and the 'best ever' for Klinsmann". 4 December 2022. Archived from the original on 9 December 2022. Retrieved 9 December 2022. Benedict, Oreva (19 December 2022). "Pele is still the GOAT ahead of Messi, Ronaldo – Oliseh". Archived from the original on 24 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "Ex-England ace Reid believes Pele is the greatest of all time". 21 December 2022. Archived from the original on 13 January 2023. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "Leboeuf: Messi Can Never Overhaul GOAT Pele; Martinez Should Grow Up! Zidane To Succeed Deschamps". 21 December 2022. Archived from the original on 22 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. Chakraborty, Sushan (19 December 2022). "10 greatest football players of all time". Archived from the original on 9 January 2023. Retrieved 22 December 2022. Dalglish, Kenny (1 January 2023). "Sir Kenny Dalglish on Pele: The greatest-ever was so humble but left me starstruck". Archived from the original on 23 January 2023. Retrieved 23 January 2023. "O Rei arrives in style: 100 great World Cup moments". FIFA. Archived from the original on 3 December 2022. Retrieved 4 December 2022. "And God created Pele". The Guardian. 30 June 2003. Archived from the original on 8 October 2016. Retrieved 30 June 2003. Jame Walker-Roberts (29 December 2022). "Ronaldo and Roberto Carlos pay tribute to Pelé after his death aged 82 - 'his legacy transcends generations'". EuroSport. "Pele: Neymar, Kylian Mbappe and Cristiano Ronaldo among those paying tribute". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "Pele dies - live updates: Pele's final message to the world as tributes pour in from sporting royalty". Sky News. Archived from the original on 26 January 2023. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "'Your legacy will be eternal': sporting world pays tribute to Brazilian legend Pele". Reuters News. Archived from the original on 31 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. Roberts, Jamie (30 December 2022). "Will Smith leads celebrity tributes as world mourns Pele after icon's death". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "What they said about Pele". FIFA. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 4 December 2020. "Pele and Mourinho win BBC awards". BBC. 11 December 2005. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 17 July 2017. "Alfredo Di Stefano: Pele is better than Messi and Ronaldo". ESPN. 10 September 2012. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 16 June 2014. "Speech by Nelson Mandela at the Inaugural Laureus Lifetime Achievement Award, Monaco 2000". nelsonmandela.org. 25 May 2000. Archived from the original on 24 April 2016. Retrieved 9 February 2017. Kissinger, Henry (14 June 1999). "PELE: The Phenomenon". Time. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 21 January 2016. Goldblatt, David (29 December 2022). "Pelé set the standards by which footballing greatness is judged". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 October 2023. Retrieved 9 September 2023. Michelle Roehm McCann (2012). "Boys Who Rocked the World: Heroes from King Tut to Bruce Lee". p. 140. Simon and Schuster "Pelé Museum is opened with a 2,400-piece collection and a hologram of the King of Football". Copa 2014. Archived from the original on 26 July 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2018. "Brazil inaugurates Pele Museum". ESPN. Archived from the original on 26 July 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2018. "Pele: FIFA Ballon d'Or Prix d'honneur". FIFA. Archived from the original on 1 October 2019. Retrieved 13 August 2020. Crépin, Timothé (2 December 2015). "Pelé devait être le recordman" (in French). France Football. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 18 July 2017. Crépin, Timothé (14 December 2020). "Ballon d'Or Dream Team : Découvrez les révélations de ce onze de légende !". France Football (in French). Retrieved 14 December 2020. "Prolific Scorers Data : Best League Goalscorers All-Time". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 9 July 2023. Retrieved 9 June 2021. "RSSSF : Prolific Scorers Data-Additional Data on Pelé". rsssf. com. 28 January 2021. Archived from the original on 12 July 2023. Retrieved 2 June 2021. "Was Pele paid to tie his shoes during the 1970 World Cup final?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 15 September 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. Jaskulka, Marie (2022). Puma. ABDO. pp. 38–40. "One of the Greatest Marketing Plays of All Time Was a Pair of Untied Pumas". Medium. Archived from the original on 15 September 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. "Marriages, music, endorsements: Pele's life away from the field". France24. Archived from the original on 15 September 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. "Brazilian Soccer Great Pelé Has Died at 82". NBC New York. 29 December 2022. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "Pele Through the Years". ABC News. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. Pham, Jason (30 December 2022). "Pelé Had 7 Kids With 4 Women Before His Death—See All His Children & Where They Are Now". StyleCaster. SHE Media. Archived from the original on 31 December 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022. "Pelé Scores A Marriage Hat Trick". Latin Times. 20 August 2014. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2016. "Pele's son Edinho jailed for 33 years for Drug Trafficking". biharprabha.com. Indo-Asian News Service. 1 June 2014. Archived from the original on 2 June 2014. Retrieved 1 June 2014. "Brazil: Footballer Pele's son Edinho in jail over drug trafficking charges". BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2018. Simón, Yara (28 August 2015). "A Look Back at Xuxa and Pelé's Controversial Relationship". Remezcla. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2017. Yapp, Robin (23 January 2011). "Doctor who helped Pele father twins on run after assault convictions". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 27 January 2011. Retrieved 31 December 2022. "Brazilian Soccer Legend Pelé Scores A Marriage Hat Trick [VIDEO]". Latin Times. 9 March 2018. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2016. "Pele's daughter dies of cancer at 42". ESPN. 17 October 2006. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 3 February 2014. "Pele misses funeral of "daughter he never wanted" Archived 21 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine. People. 18 October 2006. Retrieved 3 February 2014 "Daughter who sued Pele dies of cancer at 42" Archived 22 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. 17 October 2006. Retrieved 3 February 2014. "The Daughter Pelé Didn't Want Dies of Breast Cancer in Brazil". Brazzil. 17 October 2006. Archived from the original on 22 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "'My first love was a Japanese and will also be the last,' says Pele". Fabwags.com. FabWags. 11 December 2012. Archived from the original on 4 December 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022. "Football legend Pele marries 'definitive love'". The Belfast Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 31 May 2018. "BRAZIL: PELE STEPS DOWN AS MINISTER OF SPORT | AP Archive". Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "Estátua de Pelé é "amordaçada" na cidade natal do jogador" (in Portuguese). Terra Networks. 21 June 2013. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2014. O'Boyle, Brendan (1 June 2022). "Brazilian soccer icon Pele calls on Putin to stop 'wicked' Ukraine invasion". Reuters. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 9 August 2022. "From King to President, Pelé asks Putin to please end the invasion in Ukraine". Marca. Spain. 3 June 2022. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 9 August 2022. "Football legend Pele tells Putin: 'stop the invasion'". France 24. 1 June 2022. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 9 August 2022. Morrissey, Paul (27 April 2013). "Romario trolls Pele on Twitter, says he's a phony Catholic and talks nothing but shit". 101greatgoals.com. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Guilherme Seto, Rafael Reis (28 November 2014). "Pelé tem apenas um rim desde que era jogador de futebol". Folha de S.Paulo (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 28 November 2014. "Pele in hospital, hip operation a success, report says". ESPN. 13 November 2012. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 16 June 2014. "Pele recovering in hospital after collapsing with exhaustion". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2018. Gray, Melissa. "Pele recovering after kidney stone procedure in Brazil". CNN. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2019. "Pele: Brazil legend reluctant to leave his home, says son Edinho". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2020. "Pelé: Brazil legend remains in intensive care as he recovers from surgery to remove tumour". Sky Sports. 11 September 2021. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 11 September 2021. "Pele in 'stable' condition after respiratory problems, hospital says". Reuters. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "Brazil: Pele released from hospital to begin chemotherapy". DW. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2021. "Pele: Brazil legend in hospital but daughter confirms no emergency". BBC Sport. 30 November 2022. Archived from the original on 8 December 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. "Pelé é internado e passa por exames em São Paulo; quimioterapia não responde e situação preocupa (in Portuguese)". ESPN Brasil. 30 November 2022. Archived from the original on 3 January 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2022. "World Sport Humanitarian Hall of Fame Inductees – Pelé". Sports Humanitarian. Archived from the original on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "Pele Law on sports introduced in Brazil". BBC News. 25 March 1998. Archived from the original on 3 November 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2017. "Pele is dropped as Brazilian Sports Minister". Archived from the original on 3 December 2020. Retrieved 28 August 2020. "UNICEF denies Pele corruption reports". SportBusiness.com. Reuters. 23 November 2001. Archived from the original on 31 July 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2016. Pelé slips from Brazil pedestal Archived 20 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The Observer, 25 November 2001. "Education: Sir Pele lends his support". The Independent. 3 December 1997. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 6 May 2011. Darby 2002, p. 110. Bellos 2003, p. 114. "How football legend, Arthur Ashe were trapped in Lagos during 1976 coup" Archived 26 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Pulse. Retrieved 26 July 2018 "The story of Lagos' ill-fated 1976 Professional Tennis Tournament" Archived 14 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine. Africa's Country. Retrieved 26 July 2018 "Pelé (1977)". IMDb. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. Pelé at AllMusic "Escape to Victory remake: who should follow in Pelé's footsteps?". The Guardian. 27 June 2014. Archived from the original on 4 January 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2016. "Estranhos extraterrestres chegavam na tela da Excelsior para fazer contato com Pelé" (in Portuguese). Cartâo de Visita. 16 January 2013. Archived from the original on 6 April 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2016. Mark Deming (2016). "Mike Bassett: England Manager (2001)". Movies & TV Dept. The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 March 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2016. Hirshey, David. "Pelé: When Soccer Ruled the USA". ESPN. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2020. "Davos Annual Meeting 2006 -The Role of Sports in Development". World Economic Forum. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 16 September 2023 – via YouTube. Rawcliffe, Jonathan (9 November 2007). "Pelé joins Sheffield celebrations". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 9 November 2007. "Pele scouts for Fulham". BBC Sport. 9 October 2002. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 10 June 2006. Blevins 2011, p. 756. Bell, Jack (1 August 2010). "Cosmos Begin Anew, With Eye Toward M.L.S." The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 February 2018. Retrieved 4 August 2010. "Santos hope for Pele comeback". ESPN. 4 August 2011. Archived from the original on 25 May 2014. Retrieved 22 May 2014. Russell, Scott (1 October 2009). "Reasons why Rio is the right Olympic choice". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 8 May 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2016. "Pelé to receive honorary degree". University of Edinburgh. 9 August 2012. Archived from the original on 21 April 2023. Retrieved 9 August 2012. "World Cup king Pele scores for Rio 2016 at ANOCA assembly". Sports Features.com. Archived from the original on 27 July 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2018. Forsyth, Justin (12 August 2012). "The 2012 hunger summit could be the real legacy of the Games". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 December 2014. Retrieved 27 November 2014. "Sport stars get behind Olympic hunger summit". 10 Downing Street. 12 August 2012. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 27 November 2014. Coughlan, Maggie; Perry, Simon (12 August 2012). "Spice Girls, One Direction Bring Olympics to a Dazzling End". People. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017. Retrieved 16 July 2017. Batterman, L. Robert (23 June 2016). "Soccer Legend Pelé Calls for a Yellow Card against Samsung". The National Law Review. Proskauer Rose LLP. ISSN 2161-3362. Archived from the original on 26 June 2016. Retrieved 23 June 2016. Sperling, Frederick (4 September 2020). "Famous Athlete Cases Offer Right Of Publicity Lessons". ArentFox Smith. ArentFox Schiff LLP. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "Pelé: Charity Work & Causes". Look to the Stars. 2006. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 6 December 2022. "Medal collection to remember Pele's golden goals". The Times. Malta. 21 December 2007. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 6 December 2022. "Pele for Ballymun". independent. 28 September 2009. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2022. "Pelé and Beckenbauer unite for SOS Children's Villages". 15 November 2004. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 6 December 2022. Kinver, Mark (5 May 2009). "Rainforest film brings out stars". Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2022. "Pele to donate auction money to Santos, charity". Reuters. 2 June 2016. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 6 December 2022. Downie, Andrew (23 August 2021). "Pele brings sporting stars together for charity auction". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 December 2022. Retrieved 6 December 2022. "Pele Foundation – Home". pele10.org. 2020. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 6 December 2022. Mitchell, Stuart (13 October 2018). "International Icon and Humanitarian Pelé Announces the Launch of His New Global Charitable Foundation – Ethical Marketing News". Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2022. "Morte de Pelé: entenda a falência múltipla de órgãos, provocada pelo câncer de cólon". O Globo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 29 December 2022. Archived from the original on 13 January 2023. Retrieved 14 January 2023. "Morre o Rei Pelé aos 82 anos". ge (in Brazilian Portuguese). 29 December 2022. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023. Retrieved 14 January 2023. "Pelé não responde mais à quimioterapia e está em cuidados paliativos". Folha de S.Paulo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 3 December 2022. Archived from the original on 22 January 2023. Retrieved 14 January 2023. "Pele's cancer has advanced, says hospital". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 21 December 2022. "Brazilian football legend Pele dies at age 82". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 8 June 2023. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "Brazilian football icon Pele has died at the age of 82". Sky News. 29 December 2022. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "Doña Celeste, madre de Pelé, tiene 100 años y no es consciente del fallecimiento de su hijo". El Deber (in Spanish). Santa Cruz de la Sierra. Agence France-Presse. 3 January 2023. Archived from the original on 3 January 2023. Retrieved 3 January 2023. "'The greatest of all time' - Ronaldo leads Pele tributes". BBC. 30 December 2022. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2023. "Pele: Neymar, Kylian Mbappe and Cristiano Ronaldo among those paying tribute". BBC News. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "Pele dies - live updates: Pele's final message to the world as tributes pour in from sporting royalty". Sky News. Archived from the original on 26 January 2023. Retrieved 30 December 2022. Roberts, Jamie (30 December 2022). "Will Smith leads celebrity tributes as world mourns Pele after icon's death". mirror. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "Brazil starts three days of mourning as country lights up in memory of Pelé". ITV News. 30 December 2022. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "FIFA's flags at half mast to honour Pele". Reuters. Archived from the original on 31 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. Watson, Katy; Chatterjee, Phelan (30 December 2022). "'Thank you, King': Brazil lights up in honour of Pelé". BBC News. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "Wembley arch lit up in Brazil colours in tribute to Pele". The Independent. 29 December 2022. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "European leagues to honour Pele with pre-match tributes". Radio France Internationale. 30 December 2022. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 1 January 2022. "FIFA asks for minute of silence at football games to honour Pele". Qatar Tribune. 1 January 2023. Archived from the original on 1 January 2023. Retrieved 1 January 2023. Savarese, Maurico (2 January 2022). "Brazilians mourn Pelé at the stadium where he got his start". Associated Press News. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2022. Downie, Andrew (2 January 2022). "'I had to say goodbye': thousands pay their respects to Pelé in Brazil". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "Pele death: Visitors flock to see star's open coffin in Brazil football stadium". Sky News. 2 January 2022. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2022. Avila, Daniela (2 January 2022). "Thousands of Fans Line Up to Pay Their Respects to Pelé at Public Wake in Brazil". People. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "'Pelé is eternal!': Tributes pour in from soccer stars, world leaders". The Washington Post. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "Pele's funeral and burial to take place in hometown Santos". AP NEWS. 29 December 2022. Archived from the original on 14 March 2023. Retrieved 30 December 2022. Philips, Tom; Ionova, Ana (3 January 2022). "Brazil president joins mourners paying tribute to Pelé before funeral". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 January 2023. Retrieved 3 January 2022. Church, Ben; Rocha, Camilo (3 January 2022). "Funeral procession for Pelé begins after thousands, including Brazil's president Lula da Silva, visited 24-hour wake". CNN. Archived from the original on 3 January 2023. Retrieved 3 January 2022. Avila, Daniela (2 January 2022). "Thousands of Fans Line Up to Pay Their Respects to Pelé at Public Wake in Brazil". People. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2022. Church, Ben; Rocha, Camilo (3 January 2022). "Funeral procession for Pelé begins after thousands, including Brazil's president Lula da Silva, visited 24-hour wake". CNN. Archived from the original on 3 January 2023. Retrieved 3 January 2022. Philips, Tom; Ionova, Ana (3 January 2022). "Brazil president joins mourners paying tribute to Pelé before funeral". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 January 2023. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Brazil bids goodbye to 'King' Pele". Prothom Alo. 2 January 2022. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2022. Philips, Tom; Ionova, Ana (3 January 2022). "Private burial of Pelé in Santos after eight-mile funeral procession". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 January 2023. Retrieved 3 January 2022. Rocha, Camilo; George Ramsay; Tara John; Flora Charner; Rodrigo Pedroso (29 December 2022). "Brazilian soccer legend Pelé dies at 82". CNN. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. Philips, Tom; Ionova, Ana (3 January 2022). "Private burial of Pelé in Santos after eight-mile funeral procession". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 January 2023. Retrieved 3 January 2022. Nsabimana, Eddie (16 March 2023). "Kagame honours Pele as Rwanda stadium is named after late icon". The New Times. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 16 March 2023. "Kigali Pelé Stadium inaugurated in Rwanda" (Press release). FIFA. 15 March 2023. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 16 March 2023. "Football great Pelé enters dictionary as synonym for 'unique'". BBC News. 27 April 2023. Archived from the original on 7 July 2023. Retrieved 27 April 2023. "Pelé statistics". m-qp-m.us. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 18 October 2007. "Jogos e goals de Pelé pelo Santos" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Santos FC. 2012. pp. 1–11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 December 2012. "IFFHS NEWS AND STATISTICS OF THE WEEK 51". iffhs.com. 19 December 2020. Archived from the original on 27 March 2021. Retrieved 12 June 2021. "IFFHS Top Division Scorers". Archived from the original on 18 August 2011. Retrieved 4 August 2020. Castano Graff, Emilio; Orlando Duarte, Gregoriak. "Pelé History". Soccer Europe. Archived from the original on 8 February 2007. "Biographies: Pelé Statistics". Soccer Europe. 2012. Archived from the original on 8 February 2007. Retrieved 1 August 2006. Brito, Ricardo. "Campeonato Paulista 1957". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 11 December 2006. Retrieved 15 July 2017. Pontes, Ricardo; Bovi Diogo, Julio (9 February 2009). "Brazil Cup 1959". RSSSF Brazil. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 16 June 2014. Pontes, Ricardo; Bovi Diogo, Julio (18 June 2009). "Brazil Cup 1960". RSSSF Brazil. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 16 June 2014. Pontes, Ricardo; Bovi Diogo, Julio (18 June 2009). "Brazil Cup 1963". RSSSF Brazil. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 16 June 2014. "Pelé". Santos Futebol Clube. 2024. Archived from the original on 15 January 2024. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "Campeonato Brasileiro de Seleções 1959". rsssfbrasil. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "Pelé o atleta do século". globo.com. 3 January 2016. Archived from the original on 29 January 2010. Retrieved 3 January 2016. Pierrend, José Luis; Beuker, John; Ciullini, Pablo; Gorgazzi, Osvaldo. "Copa Libertadores de América 1963". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 23 January 2023. Retrieved 9 July 2017. "Recopa Intercontinental 1968/69" Archived 30 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Retrieved 1 June 2018 Marcos, Antonio (26 August 2013). "Um campeonato, dois campeões: Conheça a história do Paulista de 73". globo.com. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 25 July 2017. "FIFA 18 World Cup Icons player ratings revealed: Pele, Gary Lineker and the 17 classic players". Bristol Post. 27 June 2018. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2018. Pontes, Ricardo (18 January 2002). "Torneio Rio-São Paulo – List of Champions". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2017. Litterer, David A. (14 May 2010). "North American Soccer League". Rec. Sport. Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 24 July 2017. "Pelé: Most wins of the FIFA World Cup by a player". Guinness World Records. 14 December 2017. Archived from the original on 22 September 2022. Retrieved 14 December 2017. Pierrend, José Luis. "Copa del Atlântico". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 14 July 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2014. Bishara, Motez; Ridell, Don (2 June 2016). "Pele: My four greatest moments". CNN. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2017. "Pelé – Edson Arantes do Nascimento". Samba Foot. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2017. Pierrend, José Luis (21 September 2007). "Copa Oswaldo Cruz". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 14 July 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2014. Pierrend, José Luis (30 September 1998). "Copa Bernardo O'Higgins". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 29 September 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2014. "The 20th Century Boys". BBC Sport. 10 December 2000. Archived from the original on 29 October 2022. Retrieved 6 May 2011. "FIFA tangled in a web after big Maradona 'poll'". Belfast Telegraph. Archived from the original on 8 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2022. "Split decision-Pele, Maradona each win FIFA century awards after feud". Sports Illustrated. 11 December 2000. Archived from the original on 18 October 2011. Retrieved 6 May 2011. Janeiro, Por SporTV comRio de (December 2015). "Revista faz revisão na Bola de Ouro, e Pelé desbanca Messi nas regras atuais". sportv.com. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 26 December 2018. "Brazil v Chile, 17 September 1959". Retrieved 1 April 2024. "Brazil v Chile, 20 September 1959". Retrieved 1 April 2024. sfcadmin (5 March 2020). "Em 5 de março de 1961 Pelé inventou o Gol de Placa". Santos FC (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 14 December 2022. Retrieved 14 December 2022. "Você sabia? Expressão 'gol de placa' nasceu de um golaço de Pelé – Gazeta Esportiva". gazetaesportiva.com. 2 May 2020. Archived from the original on 14 December 2022. Retrieved 14 December 2022. Carlos, Antonio (19 March 2010). "Taça Brasil". Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 26 December 2018. "Intercontinental Club Cup 1963". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 3 February 2023. "Intercontinental Cup 1962 – Top Scorer". worldfootball.net. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2018. "Intercontinental Cup 1963 – Top Scorer". worldfootball.net. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2018. "Todos os Artilheiros do Torneio Rio-São Paulo" (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Andres, Juan Pablo; Ballesteros, Frank; Di Maggio, Roberto. "Copa Libertadores – Topscorers". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 14 November 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2017. "Overseas Personality of the Year – previous winners". BBC. 11 November 2003. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 25 July 2017. Casari, Yuri (27 July 2015). "Bola de Prata Placar 1970" (in Portuguese). Escrevendo Futebol. Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 2 November 2015. Pierrend, José Luis (22 December 2000). "South American Player of the Year 1973". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 3 February 2023. "NASL All-Star Teams, all-time". homepages.sover.net. Archived from the original on 13 April 2018. Retrieved 16 December 2018. "Pele Voted Most Valuable Player". The New York Times. 23 August 1976. Archived from the original on 13 December 2022. Retrieved 13 December 2022. "Heritage". nycosmos.com. New York City: New York Cosmos. Archived from the original on 24 October 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2011. Cosmos honor Pele by retiring number – almost 37 years after they already did Archived 22 September 2022 at the Wayback Machine by Chris Wright on ESPN, 15 June 2013 "O triunfo do Rei Pelé – sambafoot.com, Futebol + Brasil". 19 April 2009. Archived from the original on 19 April 2009. Alex (23 October 1940). "The timeline of Pele – "The Great Brazilian"". Timetoast timelines. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2022. "Brazilian soccer star Pele was presented with a bronze". United Press International. 16 May 1981. Retrieved 23 January 2023. "FIFA Order of Merit" (PDF). FIFA. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Pelé - 1993 Inductee | National Soccer Hall of Fame". Pelé - 1993 Inductee | National Soccer Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 19 December 2023. "France Football's World Cup Top-100 1930–1990". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 6 October 2009. Retrieved 3 February 2023. "MARCA Leyenda". Marca (in Spanish). Spain. 2018. Archived from the original on 6 April 2018. Retrieved 5 December 2022. World All-Time Teams Archived 22 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Retrieved 26 November 2014 Stokkermans, Karel (23 December 2015). "France Football's Football Player of the Century". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 31 December 2015. Retrieved 16 July 2017. Kissinger, Henry (14 June 1999) Time 100 – PELE: The Phenomenon Time. Retrieved 22 May 2010 "England Player Honours – World Soccer Players of the Century". englandfootballonline.com. 1999. Archived from the original on 4 April 2021. Retrieved 5 December 2022. Bar-On 2014, p. 192. "Pelé Fast Facts" Archived 22 August 2022 at the Wayback Machine. CNN. 1 June 2015. Retrieved 20 October 2015 "IFFHS' Century Elections". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 3 March 2009. Retrieved 3 February 2023. "IFFHS (International Federation of Football History & Statistics)". IFFHS. Archived from the original on 9 November 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2018. Lovina Chidi, Sylvia (13 June 2014). The Greatest Black Achievers in History. Lulu. p. 680. ISBN 978-1-291-90933-3. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 26 September 2020. "Player Bios". U.S. Soccer. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 9 July 2017. "Pele's list of the greatest". BBC. 4 March 2004. Archived from the original on 19 October 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2018. "Sports Personality of the Year celebrates 60th show". BBC. 10 May 2013. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2018. "IFFHS' Players and Keepers of the Century for many countries". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 3 February 2023. "Ronaldo third as Kaka scoops FIFA Player prize". Independent. 18 December 2007. Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2023. "Golden Foot Awards 2012 – Ibrahimovic, Pele, And Cantona" Archived 28 September 2022 at the Wayback Machine. Amfm magazine. Retrieved 8 January 2013 "Pele receives FIFA Ballon d'Or Prix d'Honneur". FIFA. 13 January 2014. Retrieved 14 January 2014 "How the panel voted". World Soccer. 2 July 2013. Retrieved 3 February 2018. "Legends of Football". Nordoff Robbins. 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2022. Lynch, kevin (30 October 2022). "Video: Pelé honoured with two Guinness World Records achievements in London". Guinness World Records. Retrieved 5 December 2022. Buron, Sébastien; Sionis, Hugues; Kohler, Stéphane; Terzian, Jean (2 July 2015). "Top 50 des joueurs sud-américains de l'histoire". L'Équipe. Retrieved 5 December 2022. "Why Pelé is the greatest player the game will ever know". British GQ. 23 October 2017. Retrieved 10 December 2022. "Pele quips he's not ready for comeback". China Daily. 16 March 2018. Retrieved 10 December 2022. "BREAKING NEWS – PELE IS COMING". Football Writers' Association. 24 November 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2018. "All Time Dream Team". iffhs.com. 22 May 2021. Retrieved 28 January 2023. "South America Dream Team". iffhs.com. 26 May 2021. Retrieved 28 January 2023. Moss, Gabriel (24 December 2022). "Neymar presents a 'Player of History' trophy for Pele - UK Daily News". Retrieved 28 January 2023. "Ronaldo presents Pelé's wife, Marcia Aoki, with The Best FIFA Special Award". FIFA. 27 February 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. Meade, Teresa A. (2010). A Brief History of Brazil. Infobase Publishing. p. 207. "PELÉ MOROCCO ORDER OF OUISSAM ALAOUITE MEDAL WITH CERTIFICATE". julienslive.com. Retrieved 21 April 2023. "Página 4 do Diário Oficial da União - Seção 1, número 62, de 30/03/1995 Imprensa Nacional". pesquisa.in.gov.br. 1995. Retrieved 23 January 2023. "PELÉ ORDER OF MILITARY MERIT MEDALS AND CERTIFICATE | #3391510817". Worthpoint. Retrieved 23 January 2023. Prudames, David (13 February 2002). "Those honorary knighthoods in full". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 January 2023. "Order of Cultural Merit 2004". 10 November 2004. Archived from the original on 27 June 2012. Retrieved 23 January 2023. "Brazil legend Pele receives Olympic Order". ESPN. 17 June 2016. Menon, Anirudh (30 December 2022). "Pele's incredible numbers: hundreds of goals and 3 World Cups". ESPN. Retrieved 10 January 2023. Arora, Mudeet (9 December 2022). "Who is Brazil's leading all-time top goal scorer? Pele, Neymar, Ronaldo and The Selecao's most lethal strikers". Goal. Retrieved 11 December 2022. "Happy 80th birthday to 'The King'". FIFA. 21 June 2020. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Intercontinental Cup - All-time Topscorers". worldfootball.net. 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2023. Kolos, Vladimir (2 February 2021). "Prolific Scorers Data". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Retrieved 13 February 2021. "IFFHS". iffhs.com. 30 December 2022. Retrieved 7 January 2023. "FIFA :Records being hunted in 2020". FIFA. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 12 January 2021. "Gunners". archive.ph. 2012. Archived from the original on 31 December 2012. Retrieved 18 January 2023. "Idols". Santos Futebol Clube. 2023. Retrieved 18 January 2023. "Santos Futebol Clube". archive.ph. 31 December 2012. Archived from the original on 31 December 2012. Retrieved 10 January 2023. Kilani, Imed (12 April 2016). "Top Division Scoring Records". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Retrieved 20 January 2023. "Pelé". Santos FC. Retrieved 17 December 2022. "The World's best one match goal scorer". iffhs.com. 28 December 2020. Retrieved 12 February 2023. "Acervo Histórico do Santos FC | Temporada – 1957". 18 June 2015. Archived from the original on 29 August 2016. Retrieved 7 January 2023. "Santos Futebol Clube". 29 April 2007. Archived from the original on 29 April 2007. Retrieved 20 January 2023. Pablo Andrés, Juan; Torres, Paulo (24 June 2021). "São Paulo State List of Topscorers". rsssfbrasil.com. Retrieved 21 January 2023. Kolos, Vladimir (21 December 2022). "Prolific Scorers Data". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Retrieved 10 January 2023. Kolos, Vladimir (21 December 2022). "Prolific Scorers Data". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Retrieved 10 January 2023. Kolos, Vladimir (21 December 2022). "Prolific Scorers Data". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Retrieved 10 January 2023. Lynch, Kevin (30 October 2013). "Pelé honoured with two Guinness World Records achievements in London". Guinness World Records. Retrieved 16 July 2017. "IFFHS". iffhs.com. 5 June 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2023. Archive: Brazil legend Pele retires from professional football Archived 11 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine BBC Sport. 1 October 2015. Retrieved 22 October 2015 Ijaseun, David (30 December 2022). "In memoriam: Pelé's visit to Nigeria and other things he will be remembered for". Businessday NG. Retrieved 18 January 2023. "Brazil national football team statistics and records: hat tricks". 11v11.com. 2023. Retrieved 1 January 2023. "Pele at the FIFA World Cup". FIFA. Archived from the original on 16 December 2018. "Youngest winner of the football (soccer) FIFA World Cup". Guinness World Records. 28 June 1958. Retrieved 2 April 2018. Planet World Cup – Statistics – Players Archived 7 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine Planet World Cup. Retrieved 19 October 2015 Ridley, Nathan (14 December 2022). "Julian Alvarez behind only Pele in World Cup history after double vs Croatia". mirror. Retrieved 14 December 2022. Asgar Nalwala, Ali (25 November 2022). "Youngest footballers in men's FIFA World Cup: Norman Whiteside leads list of wonderkids!". Retrieved 18 January 2023. Dhar, Pulasta (9 June 2014). "World Cup 1958 and 1962: The story of Brazil and Pele begins..." First Post. Retrieved 29 July 2017. Barca Blaugranes Staff. "World Cup: Gavi youngest knockout starter since Pele". MSN. Archived from the original on 12 December 2022. Retrieved 12 December 2022. Cunningham, Sam (13 December 2022). "Kylian Mbappe is nowhere near Pele's GOAT status even if he wins another World Cup". i. Retrieved 13 December 2022. "Which player has scored the most goals in World Cup knockout games? | The Knowledge". The Guardian. 7 December 2022. Retrieved 13 December 2022. Rai, Shreyas (17 November 2023). "Who is the youngest footballer to play for Brazil?". Goal.com. Retrieved 16 January 2024. "Endrick and Brazil's youngest debutants". 15 November 2023. Retrieved 16 January 2024. Wright, Chris (7 September 2020). "Ansu joins Rooney, Mbappe, Pulisic and Pele among youngest scorers". ESPN. Retrieved 13 December 2022. "A primeira vez de Pelé com a camisa do Santos" (in Brazilian Portuguese). Yahoo!. 28 December 2022. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Fernando, Shemal (25 September 2022). "The King of Football and Player of the Century". Sunday Observer. Retrieved 16 December 2022. Twomey, Liam (15 July 2018). "'Welcome to the club' - Pele praises Kylian Mbappe for becoming the second teenager to score in a World Cup final". The Independent. Retrieved 10 January 2023. Diamond, Harry (25 November 2022). "Appreciating the five players to score in four different World Cups". Retrieved 16 December 2022. "Messi becomes fifth player to score in four World Cups". Jamaica Observer. 22 November 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2022. "World Cup records – Most trophies, top goalscorers, penalty shootout form & amazing statistics". Goal. 25 May 2018. Retrieved 16 December 2022. Rohan Sen (23 October 2017). "On this day: The greatest footballer on the planet, Pele, turns 77". India Today. "The World Cup records Messi owns and is chasing". 2022. Retrieved 14 December 2022. "Zidane off as Italy win World Cup". BBC. Retrieved 23 March 2019. Guilherme, Maniaudet (30 December 2022). "Não foram só gols: Pelé é o maior garçom do Brasil em Copas do Mundo". ge (in Brazilian Portuguese). Retrieved 12 February 2023. "THE PLAYER WITH MOST GOAL INVOLVEMENTS". iffhs.com. 19 November 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2023. "Brazil national football team statistics and records: top scorers - Copa Bernardo O`Higgins". Retrieved 1 April 2024. "Chile national football team statistics and records: top scorers - Copa Bernardo O`Higgins". Retrieved 1 April 2024. "Pelé: A look at his records and greatest achievements". Lifestyle Asia India. 7 December 2022. Retrieved 11 December 2022. Furniss, Matt (17 November 2022). "FIFA World Cup Hat-Tricks: The Facts". The Analyst. Retrieved 20 December 2022. GÜELL, ROBERT (16 December 2015). "Luis Suárez scores first ever hat-trick in Club World Cup". FC Barcelona. Retrieved 12 December 2022. "Brazil national football team statistics and records: hat tricks - Copa Bernardo O`Higgins". Retrieved 1 April 2024. "Chile national football team statistics and records: hat tricks - Copa Bernardo O`Higgins". Retrieved 1 April 2024. Xavier, Nilson. "Os Estranhos". Teledramaturgia (in Brazilian Portuguese). Retrieved 3 December 2022. "Filmografia – O Barão Otelo No Barato Dos Bilhões". Cinemateca Brasileira. 3 March 2016. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2022. "Pelé levou sua arte até para o cinema". Jornal do Brasil. 23 October 2010. Retrieved 3 December 2022. "Pelé". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on 8 June 2017. Retrieved 3 December 2022. "Os Trapalhões e o Rei do Futebol" (in Portuguese). Cinemateca Brasileira. Archived from the original on 27 March 2016. Retrieved 22 June 2014. Clark, Ashley (10 May 2016). "Pelé: Birth of a Legend continues the soccer star's big screen legacy". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 December 2022. Bar-On, Tamir (2014). The World Through Soccer: The Cultural Impact of a Global Sport. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1442234734. Bellos, Alex (2003). Futebol: The Brazilian Way of Life. Bloomsbury. ISBN 0747561796. Blevins, David (2011). The Sports Hall of Fame Encyclopedia: Baseball, Basketball, Football, Hockey, Soccer. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0810861305. Darby, Paul (2002). Africa, Football, and FIFA: Politics, Colonialism, and Resistance. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0714649686. Dunmore, Tom (2011). Historical Dictionary of Soccer. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0810873957. Dunmore, Tom (2015). Encyclopedia of the FIFA World Cup. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0810887435. "World's Highest Paid Athlete: Brazilian Soccer Star Earns $150,000 a Year". Ebony. Johnson Publishing Company. 1963. OCLC 1567306. Freedman, Lew (2014). Pelé: A Biography. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1440829819. Heizer, Teixeira (1997). O jogo bruto das copas do mundo (in Brazilian Portuguese). Mauad Editora Ltda. ISBN 8585756527. Magill, Frank Northen (1999). Dictionary of World Biography: The 20th century, O–Z. Routledge. ISBN 1579580483. Marcus, Joe (1976). The World of Pelé. Mason Charter Publishing. p. 200. ISBN 0884053660. Pelé (2008). Pelé: The Autobiography. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1847394880. Pelé; Fish, Robert L. (1977). My Life and the Beautiful Game: The Autobiography of Pelé. Doubleday Publishing. ISBN 0385121857. Pelé at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Pelé – FIFA competition record (archived) Pelé at National Soccer Hall of Fame Pelé: A Legend Looks Back – slideshow by Life magazine List of Goals for Brazil Pelé at Santos official website Pelé at Planet World Cup