Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll (/ʃəˈkɪərə/ shə-KEER-ə, Spanish: [ʃaˈkiɾa isaˈβel meβaˈɾak riˈpol]; born 2 February 1977), known mononymously as Shakira, is a Colombian singer and songwriter. Born and raised in Barranquilla, she has been referred to as the "Queen of Latin Music" and has been praised for her musical versatility. She made her recording debut with Sony Music Colombia at the age of 13. Following the commercial failure of her first two albums, Magia (1991) and Peligro (1993), she rose to prominence in Hispanic countries with her next albums, Pies Descalzos (1995) and Dónde Están los Ladrones? (1998). She entered the English-language market with her fifth album, Laundry Service (2001), which sold over 13 million copies worldwide. Buoyed by the international success of her singles "Whenever, Wherever" and "Underneath Your Clothes", the album propelled her reputation as a leading crossover artist. Broadcast Music, Inc. described Shakira as a "pioneer" who extended the global reach of Latino singers. In 2022, MTV included her in the list of "The Most Influential Women in the History of Music", being the only Latina on the list. Her success was further solidified with the Spanish-language albums Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 (2005), Sale el Sol (2010), and El Dorado (2017), all of which topped the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart and were certified diamond (Latin) by the Recording Industry Association of America. Meanwhile, her English-language albums Oral Fixation, Vol. 2 (2005), She Wolf (2009), and Shakira (2014) were all certified gold, platinum, or multi-platinum in various countries worldwide. Some of her songs have reached number-one on the charts in multiple countries, including "Ciega, Sordomuda", "Whenever, Wherever", "La Tortura", "Hips Don't Lie", "Beautiful Liar", "She Wolf", "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)", "Loca", "Rabiosa", "Can't Remember to Forget You", "Dare (La La La)", "Chantaje", "Te Felicito", "Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53", and "TQG". Outside of music, Shakira served as a coach on two seasons of the American singing competition television series The Voice (2013–2014), had a voice role in the animated film Zootopia (2016), and executive produced and judged the dance competition series Dancing with Myself (2022). One of the most influential female artists of the 21st century, Shakira has been credited with opening the doors of the international market for other Latin artists. With over 100 million records sold worldwide, she is one of the world's best-selling musicians. She is the best-selling female Latin artist of all time, as of 2023, according to Billboard. Noted to be a "global phenom" whose impact has "reached every corner of the world", Shakira has been described as an "artistic link between the west and the east" for popularizing Middle Eastern sounds in the West, and western sounds in the East (mainly the Middle East). Due to her heritage as a Colombian of Lebanese descent, she is perceived as particularly influential for Latino and Middle-Eastern musicians, and has been noted for introducing musical genres, instruments, and techniques from across Latin America, the Middle East, and other regions to a wider audience. Shakira is also credited with popularising music in the Spanish language on a global level. She has received numerous accolades, including three Grammy Awards, fourteen Latin Grammy Awards, five MTV Video Music Awards (including the 2023 Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award), seven Billboard Music Awards, thirty-nine Billboard Latin Music Awards, twenty-one Guinness World Records, and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. She was named the Top Female Latin Artist of the Decade by Billboard twice (2000s and 2010s). For her philanthropic work with her Barefoot Foundation and her contributions to music she received the Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year and Harvard Foundation Artist of the Year awards in 2011. She was appointed to the President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for Hispanics in the United States in 2011, and Chevalier of the Order of Arts and Letters by the French government in 2012. Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll was born on 2 February 1977 in Barranquilla, Colombia. She is the only child of William Mebarak Chadid and Nidia Ripoll Torrado. She is of Spanish and Lebanese descent. Her father William was born in New York City to a family from Lebanon. When he was five, his family moved to Colombia. Her mother's side has two Spanish surnames, Ripoll and Torrado, the former of which is Catalan and originates from four brothers who immigrated from Catalonia to coastal Colombia in the 19th century. She has also stated that she has distant Italian roots through an ancestor with the surname "Pisciotti". She was raised Catholic and attended Catholic schools. She has eight older half-siblings from her father's previous marriage. Shakira spent much of her youth in Barranquilla, a city located on the northern Caribbean coast of Colombia. Shakira wrote her first poem, titled "La rosa de cristal" ('The Crystal Rose'), when she was only four years old. As she was growing up, she was fascinated watching her father writing stories on a typewriter, and asked for one as a Christmas gift. She got that typewriter at age seven, and has continued writing poetry since then. These poems eventually evolved into songs. When Shakira was two years old, her older half-brother was killed, at the age of nineteen, in a motorcycle accident; six years later, at age eight, Shakira wrote her first song, titled "Tus gafas oscuras" ('Your dark glasses'), which was inspired by her father, who for years wore dark glasses to hide his grief. When Shakira was four, her father took her to a local Middle Eastern restaurant, where Shakira first heard the doumbek, a traditional drum used in Middle-Eastern music and which typically accompanied belly dancing. She started dancing on the table, and the experience made her realize that she wanted to be a performer. She enjoyed singing for schoolmates and teachers (and even the nuns) at her Catholic school, but in second grade, she was rejected for the school choir because her vibrato was too strong. The music teacher told her that she sounded "like a goat". At school, she was often sent out of the class because of her hyperactivity. She says she had also been known as "the belly dancer girl", as she would demonstrate every Friday at school a number she had learned. "That's how I discovered my passion for live performance," she says. To instill gratitude in Shakira for her upbringing, her father took her to a local park to see orphans who lived there. The images stayed with her, and she said to herself: "One day I'm going to help these kids when I become a famous artist." Between the ages of ten and thirteen, Shakira was invited to various events in Barranquilla and gained some recognition in the area. It was at this approximate time that she met local theater producer Monica Ariza, who was impressed with her and as a result tried to help her career. During a flight from Barranquilla to Bogotá, Ariza convinced Sony Colombia executive Ciro Vargas to hold an audition for Shakira in a hotel lobby. Vargas held Shakira in high regard and, returning to the Sony office, gave the cassette to a song and artist director. However, the director was not overly excited and thought Shakira was something of "a lost cause". Undaunted and still convinced that Shakira had talent, Vargas set up an audition in Bogotá. He arranged for Sony Colombia executives to arrive at the audition, with the idea of surprising them with Shakira's performance. She performed three songs for the executives and impressed them enough for her to be signed to record three albums. Shakira's debut album, Magia, was recorded with Sony Music Colombia in 1990 when she was only 13 years old. The songs are a collection made by her since she was eight, mixed pop-rock ballads and disco uptempo songs with electronic accompaniment. The album was released in June 1991 and featured "Magia" and three other singles. Though it fared well on Colombian radio and gave the young Shakira much exposure, the album did not fare well commercially, as only 1,200 copies were sold worldwide. After the poor performance of Magia, Shakira's label urged her to return to the studio to release a follow-up record. Though she was little known outside of her native Colombia at the time, Shakira was invited to perform at Chile's Viña del Mar International Song Festival in February 1993. The festival gave aspiring Latin American singers a chance to perform their songs, and the winner was then chosen by a panel of judges. Shakira performed the ballad "Eres" ("You Are") and won the trophy for third place. One of the judges who voted for her to win was the then 20-year-old Ricky Martin, whose initial prominence had come from his membership in Menudo. Shakira's second studio album, titled Peligro, was released in March, but Shakira was not pleased with the final result, mainly taking issue with the production. The album was better received than Magia had been, though it was also considered a commercial failure due to Shakira's refusal to advertise or promote it. Shakira then decided to take a hiatus from recording so that she could graduate from high school. In the same year, Shakira starred in the Colombian TV series The Oasis, loosely based on the Armero tragedy in 1985. Since then, the albums have been pulled from release and are not considered official Shakira albums but rather promotional albums. Shakira originally recorded the song "¿Dónde Estás Corazón?" (later released on her album Pies Descalzos) for the compilation album Nuestro Rock in 1994, released exclusively in Colombia.[citation needed] The song was an instant success on radio stations in Colombia and Sony decided to finance her third record, by giving her the last chance due to previous commercial failures. Shakira returned to recording music under Sony Music along with Columbia Records in 1995 with Luis F. Ochoa, using musical influences from a number of countries and an Alanis Morissette-oriented persona which affected two of her next albums.[failed verification] These recordings spawned her third studio album, and her international debut album, titled Pies Descalzos. Recording for the album began in February 1995, after the success of her single "¿Dónde Estás Corazón?". The album, Pies Descalzos, was released in October 1995 in Latin American countries and in February 1996 in the US. It reached number five on the U.S. Billboard Top Latin Albums chart. The album spawned six hit singles, "Estoy Aquí", which reached number two on the U.S. Latin chart, "¿Dónde Estás Corazón?" which reached number five on the U.S. Latin chart, "Pies Descalzos, Sueños Blancos" which reached number 11 on the U.S. Latin chart, "Un Poco de Amor" which reached number six on the U.S. Latin chart, "Antología" which reached number 15 on the U.S. Latin chart, and "Se Quiere, Se Mata" which reached number eight on the U.S. Latin chart. In August 1996, RIAA certified the album platinum status. In March 1996, Shakira went on to her first international tour, named simply the Tour Pies Descalzos. The tour consisted of 20 shows and ended in 1997. Also in that year, Shakira received three Billboard Latin Music Awards for Album of the Year for Pies Descalzos, Video of the Year for "Estoy Aqui", and Best New Artist. Pies Descalzos later sold over 5 million copies, prompting the release of a remix album, simply titled The Remixes. The Remixes also included Portuguese versions of some of her well-known songs, which were recorded as a result of her success in the Brazilian market, where Pies Descalzos sold nearly one million copies. Her fourth studio album was titled Dónde Están los Ladrones? Produced by Shakira with Emilio Estefan, Jr. as the executive producer it was released in September 1998. The album, inspired by an incident in an airport in which a suitcase filled with her written lyrics was stolen, became a bigger hit than Pies Descalzos. The album has reached a peak position of number 131 on the U.S. Billboard 200 and held the top spot on the U.S. Latin Albums chart for 11 weeks. It has since sold over 7 million copies worldwide and 1.5 million copies in the U.S. alone, making it one of the best selling Spanish albums in the U.S. Eight singles were taken from the album including "Ciega, Sordomuda", "Moscas En La Casa", "No Creo", "Inevitable", "Tú", "Si Te Vas", "Octavo día", and "Ojos Así". Shakira also received her first Grammy Award nomination in 1999 for the Grammy Award for Best Latin Rock or Alternative Album. Shakira's first live album, MTV Unplugged, was recorded in New York City on 12 August 1999. Highly acclaimed by American critics, it is rated as one of her best-ever live performances. In March 2000, Shakira embarked on her Tour Anfibio, a two-month tour of Latin America and the United States. In August 2000, she won an MTV Video Music Award in the category of People's Choice – Favorite International Artist for "Ojos Así". In September 2000, Shakira performed "Ojos Así" at the inaugural ceremony of the Latin Grammy Awards, where she was nominated in five categories: Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album for MTV Unplugged, Best Female Rock Vocal Performance for "Octavo Día", Best Female Pop Vocal Performance and Best Short Form Music Video for the video for "Ojos Así". Upon the success of Dónde Están los Ladrones? and MTV Unplugged, Shakira began working on an English crossover album. She learned English with the help of Gloria Estefan. She worked for over a year on new material for the album. "Whenever, Wherever", called "Suerte" in Spanish-speaking countries, was released as the first and lead single from her first English album and fifth studio album throughout the period between August 2001 and February 2002. The song took heavy influence from Andean music, including the charango and panpipes in its instrumentation. It became an international success by reaching number one in most countries. It was also her first success in the U.S., reaching number six on the Hot 100. Shakira's fifth studio album and first English language album, titled Laundry Service in English-speaking countries and Servicio De Lavanderia in Latin America and Spain, was released on 13 November 2001. The album debuted at number three on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart, selling over 200,000 records in its first week. The album was later certified triple platinum by the RIAA in June 2004 as well. It helped to establish Shakira's musical presence in the mainstream North American market. Seven singles were taken from the album such as "Whenever, Wherever"/"Suerte", "Underneath Your Clothes", "Objection (Tango)"/"Te Aviso, Te Anuncio (Tango)", "The One", "Te Dejo Madrid", "Que Me Quedes Tú", and "Poem to a Horse". Because the album was created for the English-language market, the rock, and Spanish dance-influenced album gained mild critical success, with some critics claiming that her English skills were too weak for her to write songs for it; Rolling Stone, for one, stated that "she sounds downright silly" or "Shakira's magic is lost in translation". A similar view was expressed by Elizabeth Mendez Berry in Vibe: "While her Spanish-language albums sparkled with elegant wordplay, this record is rife with cliches, both musically and lyrically. [...] For Anglophone Latin lovers, Shakira's lyrics are best left to the imagination." Despite this fact, the album became the best-selling album of 2002, selling more than 13 million copies worldwide. and became the most successful album of her career to date. The album earned her the title of the biggest Latin female crossover artist in the world. Around this time, Shakira also released four songs for Pepsi for her promotion in the English markets: "Ask for More", "Pide Más", "Knock on My Door", and "Pídeme el Sol". In Chicago Tribune, journalist Joshua Klein defined her international ascent "as multilateral, multicultural and cooperative as they come." In 2002, at Aerosmith's MTV Icon in April 2002, Shakira performed "Dude (Looks Like a Lady)". She also joined Cher, Whitney Houston, Celine Dion, Mary J. Blige, Anastacia, and the Dixie Chicks for VH1 Divas Live Las Vegas. In August, she performed "Objection (Tango)" at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards, and won the International Viewer's Choice Award with "Whenever, Wherever". She also won the Latin Grammy Award for the category of Best Short Form Music Video for the Spanish version of the video. In October, she won five MTV Video Music Awards Latin America for Best Female Artist, Best Pop Artist, Best Artist – North (Region), Video of the Year (for "Suerte"), and Artist of the Year. In November, she embarked on the Tour of the Mongoose with 61 shows occurring by May 2003. The tour was also her first worldwide tour, as legs were played in North America, South America, Europe, and Asia. Shakira's label, Sony BMG, also released her Spanish greatest-hits compilation, Grandes Éxitos. A DVD and 10-track live album, titled Live & Off the Record, was also released in 2004, commemorating the Tour of the Mongoose. Shakira's sixth studio album, Fijación Oral, Volumen Uno, was released in June 2005. The lead single from the album, "La Tortura", reached the top 40 on the Hot 100. The song also featured the Spanish balladeer Alejandro Sanz. Shakira; Sanz and Daddy Yankee ("Gasolina") were the first artists to perform Spanish language songs at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards. The album was extremely well received. It debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 chart, selling 157,000 copies in its first week. It has since sold over two million copies in the U.S., earning an 11× Platinum (Latin field) certification from the RIAA. Due to its first-week sales, the album became the highest debut ever for a Spanish-language album. After only a day of release in Latin America, the album earned certifications. In Venezuela, it earned a Platinum certification, in Colombia, a triple Platinum certification, while in Mexico demand exceeded shipments and the album was unavailable after only one day of release. Four other singles were also released from the album: "No", "Día de Enero", "La Pared", and "Las de la Intuición". Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 has since sold over four million copies worldwide. On 8 February 2006, Shakira won her second Grammy Award with the win of Best Latin Rock/Alternative Album for Fijación Oral, Vol. 1. She received four Latin Grammy Awards in November 2006, winning the awards for Record of the Year, Song of the Year for "La Tortura", Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album for Fijación Oral, Vol. 1. The lead single for Shakira's seventh album, Oral Fixation, Vol. 2, "Don't Bother", failed to achieve chart success in the U.S. by missing the top 40 on the Hot 100. It did, however, reach the top 20 in most countries worldwide. Shakira's second English studio album and seventh studio album, Oral Fixation, Vol. 2, was released on 29 November 2005. The album debuted at number five on the Billboard 200, selling 128,000 copies in its first week. The album has gone on to sell 1.8 million records in the U.S., and over eight million copies worldwide. Despite the commercial failure of the album's lead single in the U.S., it went on to spawn two more singles. "Hips Don't Lie", which featured Wyclef Jean, was released as the album's second single in February 2006. It would become Shakira's first number-one single on the Billboard Hot 100, in addition to reaching number one in over 55 countries. Shakira and Wyclef Jean also recorded a Bamboo version of the song to serve as the closing ceremony song of the 2006 FIFA World Cup. Shakira later released the third and final single from the album, "Illegal", which featured Carlos Santana, in November 2006. She then embarked on the Oral Fixation Tour, which began in June 2006. The tour consisted of 125 shows between June 2006 and July 2007 and visited six continents. In February 2007, Shakira performed for the first time at the 49th Grammy Awards and earned the nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals for "Hips Don't Lie" with Wyclef Jean. Shakira released her third live album Oral Fixation Tour in November 2007. In late 2006, Shakira and Alejandro Sanz collaborated for the duet "Te lo Agradezco, Pero No", which is featured on Sanz's album El Tren de los Momentos. The song was a top ten hit in Latin America, and topped the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart. Shakira also collaborated with Miguel Bosé on the duet "Si Tú No Vuelves", which was released in Bosé's album Papito. In early 2007, Shakira worked with American R&B singer Beyoncé for the track "Beautiful Liar", which was released as the second single from the deluxe edition of Beyoncé's album B'Day. In April 2007, the single jumped 91 positions, from 94 to three, on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, setting the record for the largest upward movement in the history of the chart at the time. It was also number one on the official UK Singles Chart. The song earned them a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals. Shakira was also featured on Annie Lennox's song "Sing", from the album Songs of Mass Destruction, which also features other 23 other female singers. In late 2007, Shakira and Wyclef Jean recorded their second duet, "King and Queen". The song was featured on Wyclef Jean's 2007 album Carnival Vol. II: Memoirs of an Immigrant. Shakira wrote the lyrics, and jointly composed the music, for two new songs that are featured in the movie Love in the Time of Cholera, based on the acclaimed novel written by Colombian author Gabriel García Márquez. García Márquez himself asked Shakira to write the songs. The songs that Shakira provided for the soundtrack were "Pienso en ti", a song from Shakira's breakthrough album Pies Descalzos, "Hay Amores", and "Despedida". "Despedida" was nominated for Best Original Song at the 65th Golden Globe Awards. In early 2008, Forbes named Shakira the fourth top-earning female artist in the music industry. Then, in July of that year, Shakira signed a $300 million contract with Live Nation, which was to remain in effect for ten years. The touring group also doubles as a record label which promotes, but does not control, the music its artists release. Shakira's contract with Epic Records called for three more albums as well – one in English, one in Spanish, and a compilation, but the touring and other rights of the Live Nation deal were confirmed to begin immediately. In January 2009, Shakira performed at the Lincoln Memorial "We Are One" festivities in honor of the inauguration of President Barack Obama. She performed "Higher Ground" with Stevie Wonder and Usher. In June 2009, Shakira was featured on Mercedes Sosa's album Cantora on their cover of Silvio Rodríguez's song "La Maza". In July 2009 Shakira released "She Wolf" as the lead single from an upcoming album with the same title. The single was a commercial success, receiving certifications in 17 countries. Shakira released her eighth studio album She Wolf in October 2009 internationally and on 23 November 2009 in the U.S. The album received mainly positive reviews from critics, and was included in AllMusic's year-end "Favorite Albums," "Favorite Latin Albums," and "Favorite Pop Albums" lists.She Wolf reached number one on the charts of Argentina, Ireland, Italy, Mexico and Switzerland. It also charted inside the top five in Spain, Germany, and the United Kingdom. It debuted at number fifteen on the Billboard 200. She Wolf was certified double-platinum in Colombia and Mexico, platinum in Italy and Spain, and gold in numerous countries including France and the United Kingdom. The album sold 2 million copies worldwide, becoming one of Shakira's least successful studio albums to date in terms of sales. Four singles were released off the album, including "She Wolf", "Did It Again", "Give It Up to Me", and "Gypsy". "Good Stuff" was released as the sole promotional single off the album. In May, Shakira collaborated with the South African group Freshlyground to create the official song of the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)", which is based on a traditional Cameroonian soldiers' Fang song titled "Zangalewa" by the group Zangalewa or Golden Sounds. The single later reached the top 20 in Europe, South America and Africa and the top 40 in the U.S. and was performed by Shakira at the World Cup kick-off and closing. It became the biggest-selling World Cup song of all time. In October 2010, Shakira released her ninth studio album, titled Sale el Sol. The album received critical acclaim and was included in AllMusic's "Favorite Albums of 2010" and "Favorite Latin Albums of 2010" year-end lists. At the 2011 Latin Grammy Awards ceremony, Sale el Sol was nominated for "Album of the Year" and "Best Female Pop Vocal Album", winning the award in the latter category. Commercially the album was a success throughout Europe and Latin America, Sale el Sol peaked atop the charts of countries Belgium, Croatia, France, Mexico, Portugal, and Spain. In the United States, it debuted at number seven on the US Billboard 200 chart marking the highest debut for a Latin album for the year and was Shakira's fifth album to peak at number one. According to Billboard, 35% of its first-week sales were credited to strong digital sales. The album also peaked at number one on both the Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums charts, achieving strong digital sales in the region. The lead single, "Loca", was number one in many countries. The album was also promoted through the release of "Sale el Sol", "Rabiosa", "Antes de las Seis", and "Addicted to You" as singles. The album had sold over 1 million copies worldwide in 6 weeks,[non-primary source needed] and over 4 million since its release. In August 2011, Shakira was featured in an episode of Dora the Explorer, and a song off the episode titled "Todos Juntos" by Dora featuring Shakira was released with a music video. In September, Shakira embarked on The Sun Comes Out World Tour, in support of her two most recent albums. The tour visited countries in North America, Europe, South America, Asia, and Africa with 107 shows in all. The tour was met with positive reactions from critics, who praised Shakira's stage presence and energy during her performances. In December 2011 Shakira released her fourth live album Live from Paris. The live album was promoted with the release of "Je L'Aime à Mourir" as a single. On 9 November 2011, Shakira was honored as Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year and performed a cover of Joe Arroyo's song "En Barranquilla Me Quedo" at the Mandalay Bay Events Center as a tribute to the singer, who had died earlier that year. In 2010 Shakira collaborated with rapper Pitbull for the song "Get It Started", which was slated to be the lead single from Pitbull's 2012 album, Global Warming. The single was released on 28 June 2012. She was also signed to Roc Nation under management purposes for her upcoming studio album. In January 2013, Ivete Sangalo released a single titled "Dançando" featuring Shakira off her album Real Fantasia. On 17 September 2012, it was announced that Shakira and Usher would replace Christina Aguilera and CeeLo Green as coaches, for the fourth season[citation needed] of the U.S. TV show The Voice, alongside Adam Levine and Blake Shelton in March 2013. Shakira did not participate in the fifth season in September 2013[citation needed] announcing that she would focus on her new album in the fall and would eventually return for the show's sixth season in February 2014. Shakira originally planned to release her new album in 2012, but due to her pregnancy, plans to release the single and video were postponed. In December 2013, it was announced that Shakira's new single had been delayed until January 2014. Shakira's self-titled tenth studio album was later released on 25 March 2014. Commercially the album debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 chart with first-week sales of 85,000 copies. By doing so, Shakira became the singer's highest-charting album on the chart, although it also achieved her lowest first-week sales figure (for an English-language album). The album spawned three singles. After releasing the first two singles from the album, "Can't Remember to Forget You" and "Empire". RCA chose "Dare (La La La)" as third single. The song "Medicine" was released as a promotional single off the album. The World Cup version was officially released on 27 May to impact radio stations, and features Brazilian musician Carlinhos Brown. On 13 July 2014, Shakira performed "La La La (Brazil 2014)" with Carlinhos Brown at the 2014 FIFA World Cup closing ceremony at the Maracanã Stadium. This performance became her third consecutive appearance at the FIFA World Cup. Shakira starred as a voice actress in the 2016 animated movie Zootopia, voicing a character named Gazelle and singing a song titled "Try Everything". She began work on her eleventh studio album at the beginning of 2016. In May 2016, she collaborated with Colombian singer Carlos Vives on the track "La Bicicleta", which went to win the Latin Grammy Award for Record of the Year and Song of the Year. On 28 October 2016, Shakira released the single "Chantaje" with Colombian singer Maluma; though the song was a track from the upcoming eleventh studio album, it was not intended to be the lead single. The song became Shakira's most-viewed YouTube video, with over 2.1 billion views as of 1 June 2018. On 7 April 2017, Shakira released the song "Me Enamoré" as the second official single taken from her eleventh studio album El Dorado, which was released on 26 May 2017. She also released the song "Perro Fiel" featuring Nicky Jam as a promotional single for the album on 25 May 2017. Its official release as the third single took place on 15 September 2017, the same date its music video, which was filmed in Barcelona on 27 July 2017, was released. Before being released as a single, "Perro Fiel" was already certified as gold in Spain for selling over 20,000 copies on 30 August 2017. In January 2018, Shakira won her third Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Album for El Dorado, making her the only female Latin artist to do so. She then released "Trap", the fourth single off the album and her second collaboration with Maluma. The El Dorado World Tour was announced on 27 June 2017,[non-primary source needed] through Shakira's official Twitter account, and was slated to be sponsored by Rakuten. Other announced partners of the tour were Live Nation Entertainment's Global Touring Division (which had previously collaborated with Shakira on her The Sun Comes Out World Tour) and Citi, which the press release named as, respectively, the producer and the credit card for the North American leg of the tour. The tour, it was announced, would begin on 8 November, in Cologne, Germany. But due to voice-strain related problems the singer experienced during her tour rehearsals, the date was cancelled one day before the original tour schedule, and it was announced that it would be rescheduled for a later date. On 9 November, for the same reason, she also announced the postponements to later dates, to be determined and announced, for both shows in Paris, as well as the following ones in Antwerp and Amsterdam.[non-primary source needed] On 14 November, Shakira made an announcement, through her social networks, in which she revealed that she had suffered a haemorrhage on her right vocal cord in late October, at her last series of rehearsals, and that she thus needed to rest her voice for some time to recover; this forced the postponement of the tour's entire European itinerary to 2018. The Latin American dates were expected to be announced later, when the tour resumed. There were plans to bring the tour, when it did resume, to countries such as the Dominican Republic. In addition, a journalist from the Brazilian edition of the Portuguese newspaper Destak announced, on his Twitter account, that the Colombian singer would visit Brazil the following March.[non-primary source needed] However, according to the same newspaper, due to Shakira's hiatus to recover from her vocal-cord haemorrhage, the Latin American dates were also postponed to the second half of 2018.[non-primary source needed] Eventually, Shakira did recover fully from the haemorrhage she had suffered and resumed her tour, performing in Hamburg, Germany on 3 June 2018. In January 2018 she announced the dates for her El Dorado World Tour. She began the first leg of her tour in Europe, starting in Hamburg, Germany on 3 June. In the same month, she released a collaboration with Maluma titled "Clandestino" as a standalone single The European leg of the tour ended in Barcelona, Spain on 7 July. She then spent a short time in Asia on 11 and 13 July, after which she went to North America. She started her time there on 3 August in Chicago and finished in San Francisco on 7 September. Her tour dates for Latin America started in Mexico City on 11 October. On the same month, Shakira was featured on a remix of Camilo and Pedro Capó's single "Tutu". The El Dorado World Tour finished in Bogotá, Colombia on 3 November, and on the same day "Nada" was released as the fifth and final single off El Dorado. She released her fifth live album Shakira in Concert: El Dorado World Tour in November 2019. Forbes ranked her among the world's highest-paid women in music in 2019, at number 10. In January 2020, she released "Me Gusta", a collaboration with Anuel AA. In February 2020, she and Jennifer Lopez performed for the Super Bowl LIV halftime show. According to Billboard, the halftime show had a viewership of 103 million people. On YouTube, it became the most viewed halftime show at that point in time. Shakira appeared in two television specials performing her songs during the COVID-19 pandemic, including Global Goal: Unite for Our Future (with "Sale el Sol") and The Disney Family Singalong: Volume II (with "Try Everything"). In December 2020, she was featured on Black Eyed Peas' single "Girl Like Me". In January 2021, Shakira sold her catalog of 145 songs to Hipgnosis Songs Fund. Financial details of the sale were not disclosed. On 16 July 2021, Shakira released a single titled "Don't Wait Up", her first English-language song since "Try Everything" (2016). On 21 April 2022, she released the song "Te Felicito" with singer Rauw Alejandro, as the lead single of her upcoming twelfth studio album. In May, she was honored by the Ivors Academy in the United Kingdom with the Ivor Novello Awards' Special Award for Songwriting celebrating her songwriting in both English and Spanish and paving the way for Latin artists. By the end of that month, the dance competition show, Dancing with Myself, on which Shakira served as an executive producer and judge, alongside Liza Koshy and Nick Jonas, premiered on NBC. The series was cancelled after one season. In June, Shakira and Black Eyed Peas released "Don't You Worry" with David Guetta. In October, she released "Monotonía", a collaboration with Ozuna, as the second single of her forthcoming album. The following month, Shakira, along with Alejandro, was nominated for Record of the Year with "Te Felicito" at the 23rd Annual Latin Grammy Awards. On 11 January 2023, Shakira released the single "Shakira: Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53", a collaboration with Argentine DJ Bizarrap. The single reached number-one in 16 countries, broke 14 Guinness World Records, and peaked at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100, marking Shakira's fifth top ten in the US and her first in over 15 years, since "Beautiful Liar" (2007). She became the first woman in US history to debut a Spanish language-track in the top-ten of the chart. The song reached number two on the Billboard Global 200 and Global Excl. US. A diss track aimed at Shakira's ex-partner, Spanish footballer Gerard Piqué, "Vol. 53" achieved record-breaking success on streaming services, and had a measurable cultural impact. On 24 February 2023, Karol G's single ″TQG″ with Shakira was released. It became Shakira's sixth top-ten, second top-ten of 2023, and highest-debuting single in the US, at number 7. It broke the Guinness World Record for the highest-charting Spanish-language track by a woman in the US. The song debuted atop the Global 200, becoming both her and Karol G's first number-one. Shakira released "Acróstico" on 11 May as the fifth single from her upcoming album. A second version of the song featuring vocals from her children Milan and Sasha, was released three days later. In June, "Copa Vacía" with Colombian singer Manuel Turizo followed as the next single of the record. The following month, on the issue dated July 29, 2023, Shakira became the first woman in history to occupy the top three spots on the Latin Pop Airplay chart—with "TQG" at the summit, and "Acróstico" and "Copa Vacía" at numbers two and three. She released "El Jefe", a collaboration with American regional Mexican band Fuerza Regida, in September as the seventh single of her forthcoming album. At the 24th Annual Latin Grammy Awards, Shakira received seven nominations, including Record of the Year and Latin Grammy Award for Song of the Year. She became the first artist in the award show's history to receive three nominations for Song of the Year in a single ceremony—with "Shakira: Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53", "TQG", and "Acróstico". Shakira won Song of the Year and Best Pop Song for "Vol. 53" and Best Urban/Fusion Performance for "TQG". Her twelfth studio album Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran was released on 22 March 2024 via Sony Music Latin. Her first studio release in nearly seven years, after El Dorado (2017), Shakira called the creative process as "alchemical" and that it turned her "tears into diamonds" and her "vulnerability into strength". The album received generally positive reviews from music critics. "Puntería" with Cardi B was released as the eighth and final single in tandem with the album. On her music, Shakira has said that, "my music, I think, is a fusion of many different elements. And I'm always experimenting. So I try not to limit myself, or put myself in a category, or... be the architect of my own jail." Shakira has frequently stated she is inspired by oriental music and Indian music, which influenced many of her earlier works. She has also been influenced by her Arab heritage, which was a major inspiration for her breakthrough world hit "Ojos Así". She told Portuguese TV, "Many of my movements belong to Arab culture." She also cites her parents as having been major contributors to her musical style. She is also strongly influenced by Andean music and South American folk music, using her native instrumentation for her Latin dance-pop songs. Her earlier Spanish albums, including Pies Descalzos and Dónde Están los Ladrones? were a mix of folk music and Latin rock. Her cross-over English album, Laundry Service and later albums were influenced by pop rock and pop Latino. "Laundry Service" is primarily a pop rock album, but also draws influences from a variety of musical genres. The singer credited this to her mixed ethnicity, saying: "I am a fusion. That's my persona. I'm a fusion between black and white, between pop and rock, between cultures – between my Lebanese father and my mother's Spanish blood, the Colombian folklore and Arab dance I love and American music." The Arabian and Middle Eastern music elements that exerted a high influence on Dónde Están los Ladrones? are also present in Laundry Service, most prominently on "Eyes Like Yours"/"Ojos Así". Musical styles from different South American countries surface on the album. Tango, a style of fast-paced ballroom dance that originated in Argentina, is evident on "Objection (Tango)", which also combines elements of rock and roll. The uptempo track features a guitar solo and a bridge in which Shakira delivers rap-like vocals. She Wolf is primarily an electropop album that combines influences from the musical styles of various countries and regions, like Africa, Colombia, India, and the Middle East. Shakira termed the album as a "sonic experimental trip", and said that she researched folk music from different countries in order to "combine electronics with world sounds, tambourines, clarinets, oriental and Hindu music, dancehall, etc." Her 2010 album, Sale el Sol, is a return to her beginnings containing ballads, rock songs, and Latin dance songs like "Loca". In 2017, Deutsche Welle's journalist Kate Müser commented on Shakira's "globalized sound": "[her] Latin beats, spiced with Middle Eastern and other world elements and made comfortably familiar by being churned through the pop machine, make you feel like a citizen of the world." As a child, Shakira was influenced by rock music, listening heavily to rock bands like Led Zeppelin, the Beatles, Nirvana, the Police and U2, while her other influences included Gloria Estefan, Madonna, Sheryl Crow, Alanis Morissette, Marc Anthony, Meredith Brooks, and the Cure. She cited Depeche Mode's "Enjoy the Silence" as the song that first sparked her passion for pop music. Shakira is well known for her dancing in her music videos and concerts. Her distinctive dancing style is said to combine Latin dancing with Middle Eastern belly dancing, which is derived from her Lebanese heritage, and her hip shaking is mentioned in songs, such as Fifth Harmony's "Brave Honest Beautiful". She is noted for usually employing minimal production, usually taking the stage with minimal makeup and natural hair, and without background dancers in her performances, preferring to focus on her vocals, dance moves, and stage presence. She often performs barefoot, a form of dance she learned as a young teen to overcome her shyness. She also mentioned in an MTV interview that she learned how to belly dance by trying to flip a coin with her belly. Shakira is a contralto and is known for her "unique and mesmerizing" singing voice which includes her "trademark" yodeling. Shakira is the first artist of the rock en español generation to become a star in the U.S. So for her, crossing over meant a linguistic, but not stylistic, switch. This allowed her to preserve a creative continuity regardless of language. —Los Angeles Times' Agustin Gurza, 2006. Shakira is a prominent figure in Latin music, commonly hailed as the 'Queen of Latin Music' for her successful crossover to the global market. The New York Times called her the "Titan of Latin Pop" for her unique and leading position in Latin music, saying: "Even as a new generation of Spanish-speaking artists are crossing over into American music's mainstream, Shakira's output stands alone". A similar comparative perspective was made by The Independent, who named Shakira an "International Phenom" for her global appeal and sales statistics, further elaborating with "To put her in perspective, other Latin exports such as Ricky Martin and Jennifer Lopez are mere minnows next to Shakira, both selling half the number of records she does". Forbes has deemed Shakira as "crossover phenom" for her unmatched success of crossover and one of the world's most powerful Latinas. Forbes further listed Shakira as one of the world's most powerful female celebrities. AllMusic's biographer Steve Huey described her as a "Wildly inventive diva who created a cross-cultural pop sound rooted in her native Colombia but encompassing nearly every territory in the world. [...] she wrote or co-wrote nearly all of her own material, and in the process gained a reputation as one of Latin music's most ambitiously poetic lyricists." Her unprecedented crossover has inspired other Latin American artists to attempt crossing over, one example is Mexican pop star Paulina Rubio, having MTV saying "there's no question that Shakira opened doors in this country for artists like Rubio to succeed". Similarly, Spin credits Shakira to have paved the way for other Latin artists to crossover, naming names like Maluma and J Balvin. After the crossover, her global and mainstream presence became big enough for Time magazine to call Shakira a "pop legend". She was marked as "one of the most influential artists of the 21st century" by ET. Throughout her career, Shakira has earned several titles, including "The Crossover Queen" by The Economist, "The Queen of World Cup" by Billboard, and "Latin America's Pop Queen" by Pitchfork. Billboard has also noted that Shakira's music videos have "redefined the role of dancing in music videos", while listing her as the best Latin female music video artist of all time. The Middle Eastern newspaper El Correo del Golfo credits Shakira with "having opened the way" for several Hispanic singers today. The authors of Reggaeton, published by Duke University Press, credited Shakira for popularizing the genre (reggaeton) in North America, Europe, and Asia, while the Public Broadcasting Service called her one of the three "most successful artists of the so-called Golden Age of Latin Music which reshaped America's cultural landscape for the twenty-first century". Alongside her impact on Latin and mainstream pop culture, Shakira has also impacted popular culture in the Arab World due to her popularity in the region. In a publication titled Popular Culture in the Arab World: Arts, Politics, and the Media, author Andrew Hammond credits Shakira for impacting and shifting the images of Arab pop stars such as Moroccan Samira Said and Lebanese Nawal Al Zoghbi, saying "[they] have shifted their image and sound in attempt to follow in her (Shakira's) footsteps". In 1999 Shakira's MTV Unplugged became the program's first episode to be broadcast entirely in Spanish. The concert is also noted to be the first time a Latin pop act attempted an Unplugged, as well as the first Latina solo act to do so. In 2001 Shakira's "Whenever Wherever" music video was aired on MTV with both the English and Spanish versions. According to a spokesman for the channel, this is noted as "the first time that U.S. MTV has aired a Spanish-language video". Following Daddy Yankee's "Gasolina" by five months, "La Tortura" was one of the first full Spanish-language music videos to air on MTV without an English version. In 2005, Sanz and Shakira performed "La Tortura" at the MTV Video Music Awards. In 2006 "Hips Don't Lie" was selected as one of the greatest songs by 21st century female artists by National Public Radio, ranked at number 65. "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)" was named by Billboard the best and most commercially successful World Cup song. Published by the US Bureau of International Information Programs, the journal Global Issues (2006) cited Shakira as an example of a celebrity "in today's globalized world" who "made it big by sharing the uniqueness of their talent and culture with the global community". In 2020, The New Zealand Herald found Shakira's longevity in the industry "particularly impressive given her ability to breach the lines of crossover, a feat not many artists have been able to achieve". A similar remark was made by Paper magazine, when writing about Shakira's longevity and her being one of the few pre-digital era artists to successfully crack the digital-streaming era of music, penning "[Shakira] is a titan in the digital era of music where she devours billions of streams with her catalog". In 2010, Google revealed that Shakira was the most searched female entertainer of the year. In 2020, Shakira was the most Googled musician of the year. In December 2021 Shakira was named by Kiss FM as one of the most influential female artists of the 21st century highlighting her achievements in the international market. Many artists have cited Shakira as an influence, including Beyoncé, Rihanna, Taylor Swift, Selena Gomez, Katy Perry, Will.i.am,Lauren Jauregui, Christina Aguilera, Justin Bieber, Fergie, Maluma, Karol G, Camilo, Nicky Jam, Brie Larson, Salma Hayek, María Becerra, Dulce María, Anuel AA, Tini Stoessel, Ozuna, Natti Natasha, Rosalía, Carla Morrison, Ibeyi, Flo Milli, Manuel Turizo, Elena Rose, Francisca Valenzuela, Paloma Mami, Natalia Lafourcade, Kali Uchis, Ed Sheeran, Farina, Jbalvin, Lele Pons, Andres Cuervo, Li Yuchun, Prince Royce, Romeo Santos, Greeicy Rendon, Wendy Sulca, Anitta, Nathy Peluso, Britney Spears, Cardi B, Rita Ora, Vaness Wu, Danna Paola, Emilia Mernes, Gale, Sofia Reyes, Camila Cabello, Sebastian Yatra, Paty Cantú, Simone & Simaria, Becky G, Sasha Keable, Lola Indigo, Young Miko, Nora Fatehi, Kris Kross Ámsterdam, Bad Gyal, Jackson Wang, Kenia Os, Mon Laferte, and Ayra Starr. Shakira has even received the admiration of intellectuals and writers such as Nobel Prize winner Gabriel García Márquez who has said "No one of any age can sing or dance with the innocent sensuality Shakira seems to have invented". Márquez wrote an essay exalting Shakira's "phenomenal musical talent", and "extraordinary maturity". The newspaper El Correo del Golfo wrote that Shakira was the greatest exponent of Middle Eastern music in the West, citing her interest in Arabic music and dance. Her influence has transcended the boundaries of pop culture, that she has become a socio-political influencer, and was named as one of the "World's Greatest Leaders" of 2017 by Fortune. The Guardian has written an extensive article about Shakira's impact on Colombia's social change, specifically in education, and her ability to discuss this issue with world leaders like Barack Obama, and Gordon Brown. Similarly The Independent has described Shakira as a "living proof that pop and politics mix" further noting that through her efforts and influence she is able to have "the ears of the global political elite". In 2006, a six-tonne (6.6-short-ton), 5-metre-tall (16 ft) statue of Shakira was installed in her hometown Barranquilla in a park near Estadio Metropolitano Roberto Meléndez. In July 2018, Shakira visited Tannourine in Lebanon which is the village of her paternal grandmother. During her visit, she visited the Cedars Reserve in Tannourine where a square in the forest was named after her. The square holds the name "Shakira Isabel Mebarak Square". In December 2023, Shakira's hometown of Barranquilla honoured the singer with a 21-foot bronze statue in a park along the banks of the Magdalena River. The sculpture shows the long, curly-haired singer belly dancing with her arms overhead in a sheer skirt with shiny aluminum decoration. Shakira has received numerous awards and recognition for her work. She is the recipient of three Grammy Awards and fifteen Latin Grammy Awards—the most for a female artist. Shakira has sold more than 75 million records worldwide, making her one of world's best-selling music artists. By the time she released Laundry Service in 2001, she have already sold 10 million albums in Latin America according to Billboard. Three of her albums are among the best-selling Latin albums in the United States: Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 (8th), Dónde Están los Ladrones? (9th) and Pies Descalzos (23rd); she is the female artist with the highest number of best-selling Latin albums in the country. Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 became the best-selling Latin pop album and the second best-selling Latin album overall of the 2000s in the U.S. Dónde Están los Ladrones? is also one of the best-selling albums in Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Mexico; as well as Pies Descalzos is one of the best-selling albums in Brazil and Colombia. Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems said that "Hips Don't Lie" was the most-played pop song in a single week in American radio history, being played 9,637 times in one week. This song makes Shakira the first artist in the history of the Billboard charts to reach the number-one spots on both the Top 40 Mainstream and a Latin chart in the same week. Additionally, she became the only artist from South America to reach the number-one spot on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, the Australian ARIA chart, and the UK Singles Chart. Shakira is the female artist with most top-ten hits on the Billboard's Hot Latin Songs chart (35). Her song "La Tortura" at one time held the chart's record for most weeks appearing at number-one, with a total of 25 non-consecutive weeks (this record is currently held by the Luis Fonsi song "Despacito" with 56 weeks). She is also the act with most number-one songs on the Latin Digital Song Sales chart (16) and the female artist with most number-one hits on the Latin Airplay chart (21). Nokia stated in 2010, that there were more Shakira music downloads in the prior year than for any other Latino artist in the last five years, and She Wolf topped the Top 10 Latino downloads. In 2010, she was ranked number five on the 'Online Video's Most Viral Artists of 2010' with 404,118,932 views. In 2011, Shakira was honored at the Latin Grammys as Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year, and by the Harvard Foundation as Cultural Rhythms Artist of the Year. She also received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame located at 6270 Hollywood Blvd. Originally, she was to be given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2004, but she turned the offer down. In 2012, she received the honor of Chevalier De L'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres. In 2014, Shakira became the first musical act to perform three times at the FIFA World Cup. In the same year, Aleiodes shakirae, a new species of parasitic wasp was named after her because it causes its host to "shake and wiggle". Forbes ranked Shakira on their list of "Top 100 World's Most Powerful Women" at number 40 in 2012, at 52 in 2013, and at 58 in 2014. In 2015 Time recognized Shakira as one of the most influential people on social media. Shakira and Argentine president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner were the only Latin influencers named on the list. More so, Time noted that Shakira has an "unparalleled platform" on social media where she promotes her philanthropy. In 2008, Shakira was named as the Honorary Chair of the Global Campaign for Education Global Action Week. In 2018, Spotify included Shakira in the list of the top 10 most streamed female artists of the decade on the platform, making her the highest streamed Latin artist. In 2020, Shakira became the first female artist to have 4 songs from different decades to have over 100 million streams on Spotify, also marking her as the only artist with Spanish songs, the only Latin artist, and third overall after Michael Jackson and Eminem to achieve this milestone. In the same year, she broke the Vevo Certified Awards record, and set it at 37, becoming the artist with the most videos with over 100 million views. She is now worth $300 million. Shakira has ventured into many other businesses and industries. She acted in the Colombian telenovela El Oasis in 1994, playing the character of Luisa Maria. Shakira began her own beauty line, "S by Shakira", with parent company Puig, in 2010. Among the first perfumes it released included "S by Shakira" and "S by Shakira Eau Florale", along with lotions and body sprays. As of 2019, she has released 30 fragrances, not counting deluxe editions. On 17 September 2015, she was featured as a playable bird in the game Angry Birds POP! for a limited time, and also in a special tournament in the game Angry Birds Friends after a few weeks. On 15 October 2015, Love Rocks starring Shakira was the first video game that featured the pop star. On 14 August 2015, at Disney's D23 Expo, it was announced that Shakira would play a character in the Disney animated movie Zootopia; in it, she would give voice to Gazelle, the biggest pop star in Zootopia. Shakira also contributed an original song to the film, titled "Try Everything", which was written and composed by Sia and Stargate. It opened to a record-breaking box office success in several countries and earned a worldwide gross of over $1 billion, making it the fourth highest-grossing film of 2016 and the 43rd highest-grossing film of all time. In December 2021, it was announced that Shakira would be an executive producer for Dancing with Myself, an NBC dance competition series. In 1997, Shakira founded the Pies Descalzos Foundation, a Colombian charity with special schools for poor children all around Colombia. It was funded by Shakira and other international groups and individuals. The name of the foundation was taken from Shakira's third studio album, Pies Descalzos, which she released in 1995. The foundation's main focus is on aid through education, and the organization has five schools across Colombia that provide education and meals for 4,000 children. On 27 April 2014 Shakira was honored with the Hero Award at the Radio Disney Music Awards for her Fundación Pies Descalzos work. In 2005, Shakira became a founding member of Latin America in Solidarity Action, a coalition of artists and business leaders seeking to promote integrated early childhood public policies. In 2008, she served as the Honorary Chair of the Global Campaign for Education Global Action Week. Later, in 2010, she collaborated with the World Bank and the Barefoot Foundation to establish an initiative that distributes educational and developmental programs for children across Latin America. Shakira is a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador and is one of their global representatives. On 3 April 2006, Shakira was honored at a UN ceremony for creating the Pies Descalzos Foundation. In March 2010, she was awarded a medal by the UN International Labour Organization in recognition of being, as UN Labour Chief Juan Somavía put it, a "true ambassador for children and young people, for quality education and social justice". In November 2010, after performing as the opening act of the MTV European Music Awards, the Colombian singer also received the MTV Free Your Mind award for her continuing dedication to improve access to education for all children around the world. In the Spanish edition of the magazine GQ, Shakira directed a few words to Sarkozy, "We are all gypsies". In the interview she made her viewpoint very clear: "What is happening now to them (the gypsies) will happen to our children and our children's children. We must turn to our citizens to act for the fundamental rights of human beings and condemn all that seems to us indictable", she declared. In February 2011, the FC Barcelona Foundation and Pies descalzos reached an agreement for children's education through sport. Shakira was honored at the Latin Grammys as the Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year on 9 November 2011, for her philanthropy and contributions to Latin Music. Also in 2011, she was appointed by President Barack Obama to the President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for Hispanics. The World Literacy Foundation announced Shakira as the recipient of the 2020 Global Literacy Award for "her significant contribution to the improvement of literacy for disadvantaged children around the world". On 2 November 2018, during a visit to her birthplace, Barranquilla, for the construction of a school through her Barefoot Foundation (Pies Descalzos Foundation), Shakira spoke about the educational policies of the government under Ivan Duque (President of Colombia, 2018–2022). Speaking against the government's intentions to reduce the national education budget from 13% to 7%, she said, "This is unacceptable. It shows that instead of progressing forward we are moving backward. We need to invest more in education and we need to build more schools in places where there are none." She also talked about social inequality and unschooling. In 2020, Shakira was appointed by Prince William, Duke of Cambridge as a voters' council member for the Earthshot prize which provides 50 environmental pioneers with the funds needed to further their work in tackling major problems impacting the environment. In May 2020, Shakira donated more than 50,000 face masks and ten respirators to combat the COVID-19 pandemic in her hometown of Barranquilla. During the 2021 Colombian protests, Shakira condemned the violence and asked President Iván Duque Márquez to "immediately stop the human rights violations" and "restitute the value of human life above any political interest". Shakira began a relationship with Argentine lawyer Antonio de la Rúa in 2000. In a 2009 interview, Shakira stated their relationship already worked as a married couple, and that "they don't need papers for that". After 10 years together, Shakira and de la Rúa separated in August 2010 in what she described as "a mutual decision to take time apart from our romantic relationship". She wrote that the couple "view this period of separation as temporary", with de la Rúa overseeing Shakira's "business and career interests as he has always done". As first reported in September 2012, de la Rúa sued Shakira in April 2013, asking for $100 million he believed he was owed after Shakira suddenly terminated her business partnership with him in October 2011. His lawsuit was dismissed by a Los Angeles County Superior Court judge in August 2013. Shakira entered a relationship with the Spanish football player Gerard Piqué in 2011. Piqué, who is exactly ten years her junior, and Shakira met in spring 2010 after he appeared in the music video for Shakira's song "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)", the official song of the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Shakira gave birth to the couple's first son, Milan, on 22 January 2013 in Barcelona, where the family took residence. Shakira gave birth to their second son, Sasha, on 29 January 2015. Forbes listed Shakira and Piqué in their list of "World's Most Powerful Couples". In June 2022, the couple confirmed in a joint statement that they were separating after being together for 11 years. In 2020, Shakira announced her completion of an ancient philosophy course through the University of Pennsylvania, describing it as an impractical hobby of hers. In November 2017, Shakira was named in the Paradise Papers. It was revealed that she was the sole shareholder of a Malta-based company which was being used to transfer $30 million in music rights. Her attorneys insisted that her use of the company was entirely legal. In 2018, due at least in part to information revealed in the Paradise Papers, Spanish authorities began an investigation into Shakira's finances. Prosecutors argued that she did not pay taxes in Spain between 2012 and 2014, during which time she was living in Spain with Piqué and their family, while Shakira argued that she maintained her primary residence in the Bahamas during that period and otherwise was touring internationally. In July 2021, a Spanish judge ruled that there was "evidence of criminality" sufficient for Shakira to be brought to trial on charges of tax fraud. In 2021, the Pandora Papers showed that Shakira submitted applications for three offshore companies in 2019. Her representatives told LaSexta that this paperwork was not filed for purposes of establishing new companies but as part of the process of dissolving existing companies. They further claimed that the companies had no income or activities and that Spanish authorities had been made aware of their existence. In July 2022, after not reaching a deal with the Spanish Prosecution Ministry, the singer decided to go to trial to prove her innocence. The prosecutor asked the judge for an eight-year prison sentence over six alleged tax fraud crimes. On 27 September 2022, a Spanish judge from Esplugues de Llobregat approved the tax fraud trial after prosecutors accused her of failing to pay 14.5 million euros ($13.9 million) in taxes. Shakira claims she has already paid all she owed plus 3 million euros ($2.8 million) as interest. A trial date was set for November 2023 after the presiding Barcelona judge, Ana Duro, received the necessary qualifying papers from both parties. On 20 November 2023, at the start of the trial, Shakira settled the case by paying a €7.5m fine. In a statement she cited her well-being and its influence on her children as being factors in her decision. Magia (1991) Peligro (1993) Pies Descalzos (1995) Dónde Están los Ladrones? (1998) Laundry Service (2001) Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 (2005) Oral Fixation, Vol. 2 (2005) She Wolf (2009) Sale el Sol (2010) Shakira (2014) El Dorado (2017) Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran (2024) Pies Descalzos International Tour (1996–1997) Tour Anfibio (2000) Tour of the Mongoose (2002–2003) Oral Fixation Tour (2006–2007) The Sun Comes Out World Tour (2010–2011) El Dorado World Tour (2018) Biography portal Colombia portal Latin music portal List of artists who reached number one in the United States List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Dance Club Songs chart Best-selling international artists in Brazil List of best-selling Latin music artists List of best-selling music artists List of Billboard Social 50 number-one artists Women in Latin music List of Colombians List of highest-certified music artists in Germany List of largest music deals Allison Trujillo Strong provides new dialogue for Gazelle. Despite Shakira is solely credited, only her archive recordings were used from the original film. "Shakira: Singer (1977–)". Biography. A&E Networks. Archived from the original on 26 March 2013. Retrieved 28 March 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Shakira – Shakira | Credits, AllMusic, archived from the original on 7 August 2020, retrieved 1 June 2020 Multiple sources: Vegas, Valeria Perasso (10 November 2011). "La noche en que Shakira fue la reina de la música latina". BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 May 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2021. "Shakira Birthday: From Beautiful Liar To Loca, 5 Hit Songs By The Queen Of Latin Music!". S.G.E. 2 February 2021. Archived from the original on 11 April 2022. Retrieved 27 October 2021. Multiple sources: Exposito, Suzy (11 August 2018). "Shakira Rocks, Body Rolls at New York Stop of El Dorado World Tour". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2020. "Shakira: Laundry Service". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on 5 June 2021. Retrieved 21 July 2020. "Shakira: Shakira". PopMatters. 17 April 2014. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2020. "Shakira". BMI. 30 April 2000. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 23 June 2021. "Las mujeres más influyentes de la historia de la música". MTV (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 18 April 2023. Retrieved 23 January 2024. "21 of the Most Influential Women Musicians of the 21st Century". Kiss 95.1. 18 December 2021. Archived from the original on 18 December 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2021. Multiple sources: "20 años de Laundry Service: 20 fans a los que este disco de Shakira les marcó la vida - E! Online Latino". E! Online. 12 November 2021. Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2022. "EU. Shakira estudió un semestre en la Universidad de California". www.milenio.com (in Mexican Spanish). Archived from the original on 8 February 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2022. "Shakira Drops New Single 'Don't Wait Up'". Music Feeds. 15 July 2021. Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2022. "Laundry Service - Shakira: 20 años en inglés y español". Archived from the original on 12 February 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2022. Billboard Staff (24 April 2023). "Shakira es la Mujer del Año de la gala inaugural Mujeres Latinas en la Música de Billboard". Billboard. Archived from the original on 24 May 2023. Retrieved 25 April 2023. Rolling Stone Staff (2 February 2024). "Shakira: el gran ícono latinoamericano". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 3 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. Marie Claire Staff (30 January 2024). "性別焦點月報｜２月生日名人拉丁天后Shakira夏奇拉介紹，究竟什麼是「厭女謀殺」？你所關心的議題都在這！". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on 3 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. D., Mariah (24 March 2024). "Run The World: How Shakira Became One Of The Most Influential Female Artists Of The 21st Century". Grammys.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: url-status (link) Piper-Shimizu, Stephane (26 September 2017). "Shakira". Variety. Archived from the original on 13 September 2023. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Billboard Staff (24 April 2023). "Shakira es la Mujer del Año de la gala inaugural Mujeres Latinas en la Música de Billboard". Billboard (in European Spanish). Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. "Powerful Women 2020". Forbes Colombia. Archived from the original on 24 October 2020. Retrieved 7 September 2020. "Shakira Mebarak, el nexo artístico entre oriente y occidente". El Correo del Golfo. 27 June 2021. Archived from the original on 27 June 2021. Retrieved 29 June 2021. ""Shakira es una amenaza: influye en el público de todo el mundo" – elEconomista.es". www.eleconomista.es (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2021. Ricaurte, Ana Bejarano. "LA GRAN COLOMBIANA – Ana Bejarano Ricaurte | Los Danieles". cambiocolombia.com (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 27 September 2023. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Así ha cambiado Shakira: Desde 'Pies descalzos' hasta su ruptura con Gerard Piqué". La Vanguardia (in Spanish). 7 June 2022. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 9 June 2022. "Chart-topper Solis named Latin artist of the decade". Reuters. 18 December 2009. Archived from the original on 22 February 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2019. "Top Latin Artists – Decade-End". Billboard. Archived from the original on 20 December 2020. Retrieved 9 January 2020. "Shakira descendiente de italianos, españoles y libaneses". MyHeritage (in Spanish). 23 June 2010. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 21 June 2023. "Shakira – MTV Unplugged (detrás de cámaras) Behind the Scenes Pt.3 HD". YouTube. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 17 August 2021. Multiple sources: Diego, Ximena (2002). Shakira: Woman Full of Grace. The Rosen Publishing Group. pp. 19–20. ISBN 0-7432-1668-7. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 29 May 2020. Williams, Zella (2010). Shakira: Star Singer/Estrella de La Cancin. Simon & Schuster. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4488-1066-6. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 29 May 2020. Day, Holly (2007). Shakira. Lucent Books. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-59018-974-0. Krohn, Katherine (2007). Biography Shakira. Lerner Publishing Group, Inc. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-8225-7159-9. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 29 May 2020. 'Yo soy una fusion. I am a fusion,' says Shakira. 'That's my persona. I'm a fusion between black and white, between pop and rock, between cultures—between my Lebanese father and my mother's Spanish blood, the Colombian folklore and Arab dance I love and American music.' Multiple sources: "Shakira y sus raíces bolivarenses". Eluniversal.com.co. 29 December 2016. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Shakira's Catalan Blood". YouTube. 2 September 2006. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2009. "Shakira: dELIAs Interview". Numberonestars.com. Archived from the original on 15 May 2006. Retrieved 28 September 2014. "Shakira Pisciotti". YouTube. 6 January 2010. Event occurs at 0:41. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 6 May 2021. "Holy Cross: Celebrities Who Are Catholic". BET.com. 17 April 2014. Archived from the original on 19 October 2023. Retrieved 3 February 2015. Turner, Amy (1 March 2009). "Shakira: Every little thing she does is magic". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Retrieved 28 February 2009. (subscription required) "Shakira: Resistance Is Futile". Rolling Stone. 11 April 2002. Archived from the original on 14 May 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "El trágico episodio que vivió Shakira con la muerte de su hermano". Cromos (in Spanish). 28 July 2021. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022. Wright, Evan (11 April 2002). "Cover Story: Shakira". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 29 April 2009. Retrieved 24 April 2007. "Shakira: 'I don't hate Britney'". BBC. Archived from the original on 2 February 2009. Retrieved 28 September 2014. "Shakira Shows Jimmy Kimmel How To Be 'Incognito,' Shares Near-Death Experience With Sea Lion (VIDEOS)". HuffPost. 16 June 2013. Archived from the original on 21 August 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Katz, Gregory. "Shakira it up with Shakira". USA Weekend. 11 December 2005. "Shakira". Gale. Archived from the original on 13 February 2002. Retrieved 3 October 2012. "Driven: Shakira". VH1. Archived from the original on 21 July 2006. Retrieved 24 April 2007. "Shakira's Biography". shakira-bio.tumblr.com. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 29 July 2013. Janes, DeAnna (14 October 2019). "Each of These Shakira Songs Will Get You Pumped for Her Super Bowl Performance". Oprah Magazine. Archived from the original on 10 November 2020. Retrieved 9 November 2020. Huey, Steve. "Shakira – Full Biography". MTV. Archived from the original on 25 April 2010. Retrieved 20 March 2010. Freedom du Lac, Josh. (31 August 2006). "In Any Language, a Whole Lotta Shakira Goin' On". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 22 January 2007. "Billboard – Artist Chart History: Shakira". Billboard. Archived from the original on 21 November 2021. Retrieved 18 March 2013. "RIAA: Gold & Platinum. Search results for Pies Descalzos". RIAA. Archived from the original on 7 September 2014. "Música- Shakira". Europanas.com. Archived from the original on 12 January 2010. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "SS Music". SS Music. Archived from the original on 15 October 2007. "Pies Descalzos: Description". Shakira.com. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010. "La cantante colombiana Shakira cumple 32 años". La Vanguardia (in Spanish). 3 February 2009. Archived from the original on 4 June 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Half.com / Music / ¿Dónde Están Los Ladrones?". Product.half.ebay.com. 26 October 2009. Archived from the original on 15 December 2006. Retrieved 31 October 2009. "Shakira – MTV Unplugged: Review". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2021. "Emilio Estefan Tops Latin Grammy Noms List". BMI. 8 August 2000. Archived from the original on 12 June 2009. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Valdes-Rodriguez, Alisa. "Queen of Crossover?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 15 April 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Gloria Estefan Reveals She Taught Shakira How To Speak English For Her 2001 'Laundry Service' Album". Los Angeles Times. 5 December 2013. Archived from the original on 28 June 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2018. "Ask Billboard". Billboard. 12 May 2004. Archived from the original on 17 October 2007. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Lechner, Ernesto (17 October 2001). "Shakira: Laundry Service". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 28 January 2014. Retrieved 11 May 2017. Berry, Elizabeth Mendez. "Shakira. Laundry Service". Vibe. Vol. 9, no. 12. p. 188. Tamara, Edwin (8 November 2011). "Shakira enshrined with Hollywood sidewalk star". The Washington Times. Archived from the original on 13 April 2021. Retrieved 15 February 2020. "Артисты: Shakira". First Class Agency. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017. Retrieved 21 July 2011. "Shakira shakes away craft, uses theatrics". Chicago Tribune. 20 January 2003. Archived from the original on 11 April 2022. Retrieved 8 April 2020. "MTV Video Music Awards: 2002 Highlights". MTV. Viacom Media Networks. 29 August 2002. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 8 December 2013. "Shakira Tickets, Wembley Arena". Ticket4-you.com. Archived from the original on 3 May 2007. Retrieved 6 May 2011. "Search results for Shakira". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. 30 April 2017. Archived from the original on 14 January 2013. Retrieved 4 January 2012. "Shakira Wins Big at Latin Grammys News". CBS News. 2 November 2006. Archived from the original on 25 September 2008. Retrieved 2 November 2006. "Oral Fixation vol. 2: Description". shakira.com. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010. WENN (18 July 2007). "Fascinating Fact 3595". Contactmusic.com. Archived from the original on 11 July 2018. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Bayona, Jose (7 November 2007). "Gabriel Garcia Marquez & Shakira are soundtrack pals". ShakiraMedia.com. Archived from the original on 11 July 2018. Retrieved 8 January 2008. "The Top-Earning Women in Music". Forbes. 29 January 2008. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 29 January 2008. Sisario, Ben (2 July 2008). "Shakira Leaves Record Company for Live Nation". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 2 July 2008. "Shakira Sued for $100 Million by Ex-Manager". The Hollywood Reporter. 12 April 2013. Archived from the original on 17 February 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2013. Gallo, Phil (18 January 2009). "We Are One: The Obama Inaugural Celebration". Variety. Archived from the original on 30 January 2009. Retrieved 8 February 2009. Mercedes Sosa - Cantora, 2009, archived from the original on 22 October 2023, retrieved 18 October 2023 "AllMusic's Favorite Albums of 2009". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. 15 December 2009. Archived from the original on 12 January 2014. Retrieved 31 December 2013. "AllMusic's Favorite Latin Albums of 2009". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. 14 December 2010. Archived from the original on 12 January 2014. Retrieved 31 December 2013. "AllMusic's Favorite Pop Albums of 2009". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. 17 December 2010. Archived from the original on 28 December 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2013. Diver, Mike (19 October 2009). "Shakira She Wolf Review". BBC. Archived from the original on 24 October 2009. Retrieved 25 October 2009.Shakira and Juanes are the most recognized Colombian artists in the world Mackey, Robert (24 May 2010). "Shakira Remixes African Hit for World Cup – The Lede Blog". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 10 August 2010. Anderson, Sara D (27 April 2010). "Shakira Records Official Song for 2010 FIFA World Cup". Aolradioblog. Archived from the original on 29 April 2010. Retrieved 30 April 2010. "Shakira scoops prestigious MTV award". FIFA. Archived from the original on 11 November 2010. Retrieved 9 November 2010. "AllMusic's Favorite Albums of 2010". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. 14 January 2011. Archived from the original on 23 June 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2013. "AllMusic's Favorite Latin Albums of 2010". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. 20 December 2010. Archived from the original on 11 January 2014. Retrieved 31 December 2013. "Past Winners Search". Latingrammy.com. Latin Academy of Recording Arts & Sciences. Archived from the original on 9 January 2014. Retrieved 9 January 2014. Cobo, Leila (6 November 2010). "Beyond Physical". Billboard. p. 74. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 28 August 2013. Aguilar, Justino (27 September 2011). "Shakira Is Latin Grammy Person of the Year". Billboard. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 28 August 2013. "Sony Music Brasil Official Twitter". Twitter. 6 December 2010. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 12 November 2011. "Shakira reviendra à Bercy le 14 juin". Chartsinfrance (in French). Archived from the original on 11 October 2011. Retrieved 10 January 2011. "Todos Juntos; un mensaje de unidad de Shakira y Dora la Exploradora". La Crónica de Chihuahua. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2023. "Shakira Honored as Latin Grammy Person of the Year". Billboard. 10 November 2011. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2011. "Emotivo tributo a Shakira como Persona del Año". El Heraldo (in Spanish). 10 November 2011. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 17 October 2013. Lewis, Corner (25 June 2012). "Shakira, Pitbull collaboration 'Get It Started' leaks online". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 6 July 2012. Ramon. "News – Shakira Signs To Roc Nation as her Management". ShakiraMedia.com. Archived from the original on 2 May 2012. Retrieved 25 April 2012. G1, Do; Paulo, em São (9 October 2012). "Ivete Sangalo participa de entrevista coletiva para lançamento de disco". Música (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Escuche 30 segundos de la nueva canción de Shakira que está grabando en Lisboa". El Heraldo Colombia (in Spanish). elheraldo.co. 30 June 2012. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2012. "Rihanna teams with Shakira for duet". Yahoo!7 News. 12 December 2013. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. "Shakira y Rihanna hacen una canción – Revista Elenco". Eltiempo.Com. 4 December 2013. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013. Retrieved 24 March 2014. O'Mance, Brad (24 February 2014). "Shakira's next single is called 'Empire' and might be online quite soon". Popjustice. Archived from the original on 6 March 2014. Retrieved 17 March 2014. "Shakira – Dare (La La La) (Radio Date: 28-03-2014)". Earone (in Italian). 26 March 2014. Archived from the original on 28 March 2014. Retrieved 1 April 2014. Corradini, Paola. "Shakira – Dare (La La La) (Radio)". Radio Airplay (in Italian). Archived from the original on 13 January 2015. Retrieved 1 April 2014. "Shakira Delivers Winning Performance at World Cup Closing Ceremony". Billboard. 13 July 2014. Archived from the original on 15 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. "Musical Superstars to wow audience at FIFA World Cup™ Final". FIFA. 2 July 2014. Archived from the original on 7 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. Cobo, Leila (3 July 2014). "Shakira Confirmed to Perform 'La La La' at World Cup Closing Ceremony". Billboard. Archived from the original on 7 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. "Shakira New Album 2016: Singer Reveals Details About The Upcoming Eleventh Studio Album : TRENDING". Youth Health Magazine. 18 February 2016. Archived from the original on 27 February 2021. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Shakira Drops New Single 'Chantaje' Featuring Maluma: Listen". Billboard. 28 October 2016. Archived from the original on 29 October 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2020. "Nicky Jam, la sorpresa en el nuevo álbum de Shakira". elsalvador.com. 26 May 2017. Archived from the original on 16 September 2017. Retrieved 15 September 2017. "Shakira Premieres 'Perro Fiel' Music Video With Nicky Jam: Watch". Directlyrics. Archived from the original on 15 September 2017. Retrieved 15 September 2017. "Shakira feat. Nicky Jam – Perro Fiel". PROMUSICAE. 30 August 2017. Archived from the original on 9 December 2017. Retrieved 31 August 2017. "SHAKIRA Wins GRAMMY for Best Latin Pop Album". Shakira. Archived from the original on 4 April 2019. Retrieved 22 February 2019. "It's time / Llegó la hora! #ElDoradoWorldTour". Shakira's official Twitter account. 27 June 2017. Archived from the original on 10 August 2017. Retrieved 22 August 2017. "SHAKIRA ANNOUNCES EL DORADO WORLD TOUR, PRESENTED BY RAKUTEN". Shakira.com. 27 June 2017. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 27 June 2017. "Shakira Announces EL DORADO WORLD TOUR, Presented by Rakuten". Live Nation. 27 June 2017. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017. Retrieved 28 September 2017. "MESSAGE FROM SHAKIRA RE COLOGNE SHOW / NOTA DE SHAKIRA SOBRE EL SHOW DE COLONIA". Shakira.com. 7 November 2017. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 7 November 2017. "to my fans and friends". Shakira's official account on Facebook. 9 November 2017. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2017. Aybar, José Antonio (28 June 2017). "Shakira incluye RD en El Dorado World Tou" [Shakira adds Dominican Republic on El Dorado World Tour] (in Spanish). El Nacional. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 19 October 2017. "Já tem SP, Rio e Porto Alegre certos na tour de Shakira, no supermarço" [We have already Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and Porto Alegre confirmed on Shakira's tour, on the great March.] (in Portuguese). José Norberto Flesch's official Twitter account. 9 October 2017. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2017. "Por conta de problemas de saúde, Shakira adia vários shows de sua turnê mundial, incluindo as apresentações na América do Sul. A princípio, ela deve remarcar para o segundo semestre as datas no Brasil e em países vizinhos" [Due to health problems, Shakira postpones several concerts from her world tour, including presentations in South America. At first, she must reschedule for the second half the dates in Brazil and neighboring countries.] (in Portuguese). Destak's official Twitter account. 11 December 2017. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 12 December 2017. "The World's Highest-Paid Women In Music 2019". Forbes. Archived from the original on 3 April 2020. Retrieved 15 April 2020. Lewis, Sophie (26 September 2019). "Jennifer Lopez and Shakira will perform at the 2020 Super Bowl halftime show". CBS News. Archived from the original on 2 October 2019. Retrieved 9 October 2019. "Here's How Many People Tuned In for Jennifer Lopez & Shakira's Super Bowl Halftime". Billboard. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2020. "Jennifer Lopez Pats Shakira on the Butt After Super Bowl Halftime Show". Entertainment Tonight. 5 February 2020. Archived from the original on 6 February 2020. Retrieved 16 February 2020. Roiz, Jessica (27 June 2020). "Watch Shakira's Rocking Performance of Inspirational 'Sale El Sol' for 'Global Goal' Concert". Billboard. Archived from the original on 29 June 2020. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Shakira danced, sang, and played the drums to her 'Zootopia' hit, reminding us all why she's a triple threat". Insider. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 11 May 2020. Millman, Ethan (13 January 2021). "Shakira Sells Her Music Catalog to Hipgnosis Songs Fund". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 13 January 2021. Retrieved 14 January 2021. Pasquini, Maria (16 July 2021). "Shakira Says She Was 'Very Nervous' to Drop 'Don't Wait Up,' Her 'First English Song in a Long Time'". People. Archived from the original on 17 September 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Qureshi, Arusha (22 April 2022). "Shakira returns with new single Te Felicito". NME. Archived from the original on 23 April 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Thraves, Lucy (20 May 2022). "Hipgnosis salutes Shakira following Ivors win for Special International Award with Apple Music". Music Week. Archived from the original on 9 June 2022. Retrieved 8 June 2022. Strout, Paige (20 May 2022). "See Shakira & Nick Jonas Bust Some Fierce Moves in Dancing With Myself First Look". E! Online. Archived from the original on 24 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. White, Peter (14 December 2021). "Shakira To Lead NBC Competition Series Dancing With Myself From Irwin Entertainment". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 2 May 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2024. White, Peter (30 March 2023). "'Dancing With Myself' Canceled At NBC After One Season". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Richards, Will (19 June 2022). "Black Eyed Peas, Shakira and David Guetta team up on 'Don't You Worry'". NME. Archived from the original on 24 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Garcia, Thania (20 October 2022). "Shakira Gets Her Heart Ripped Out by Ozuna in Second Video From Upcoming Album". Variety. Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Cobo, Leila. "Latin Grammys 2022: Jorge Drexler Wins Big, Bad Bunny Follows, Rosalía Nabs Album of the Year". Billboard. Archived from the original on 18 November 2022. Retrieved 18 November 2022. Flores, Griselda (11 January 2023). "Shakira Takes Aim at Her Ex Gerard Piqué in 'BZRP Music Sessions #53': 'You Thought You Hurt Me But You Made Me Stronger'". Billboard. Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2023. Young, Alex (11 March 2023). "Shakira and a Bunch of Her Biggest Fans Perform "Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53" on Fallon". Consequence. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Mier, Tomás (10 March 2023). "Shakira Broke a Whopping 14 Guinness World Records Thanks to Her Bizarrap Collab". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 14 March 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Trust, Gary (24 January 2023). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on 25 January 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Trust, Gary (24 January 2023). "'Flowers' Power: Miley Cyrus Soars In at No. 1 on Both Billboard Global Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on 25 January 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "Why Are We So Obsessed With Shakira's 'Bzrp Session'?". Billboard. 17 January 2023. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Panchal, Ananya (19 January 2023). "Shakira's Latest Single Breaks YouTube Record". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Villa, Lucas (16 January 2023). "Shakira And Bizarrap Shattered A Spotify Record With Their 'BZRP Music Sessions #53' Collaboration". Uproxx. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. * Loreto, Mario (21 February 2023). "Shakira and Gerard Piqué Were Some of This Carnival's Most Popular Costumes". ¡Hola!. Archived from the original on 3 May 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Ayana Herdon (17 January 2023). "Shakira's Viral Revenge Breakup Song Earns Casio $70M in Media Exposure, Rolex $40M as Lyrics Spark Social Media Conversations". Women's Wear Daily. Archived from the original on 19 January 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "El efecto Shakira contagió a Ferrari, Renault, Rolex y Casio". El Colombiano. 14 January 2023. Archived from the original on 14 January 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "Renzi come Shakira: "Il Pd aveva me e Calenda ora Speranza. Hanno scambiato una Ferrari con una Twingo"" ["Renzi like Shakira: "PD had me and Calenda, now Speranza. They traded a Ferrari with a Twingo"]. la Repubblica (in Italian). 5 February 2023. Archived from the original on 6 February 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Avevano una Ferrari e l'hanno scambiata con una Twingo". Lo ha detto il leader di Italia Viva Matteo Renzi a Milano, all'evento in sostegno alla candidatura in Lombardia di Letizia Moratti, facendo una citazione della canzone di Shakira contro il suo ex Gerard Piqué. "Shakira: universidad de México analiza impacto de su canción con BZRP" [Shakira: Mexican university analyzes impact of her song with BZRP]. El Tiempo. 23 January 2023. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2023. Villegas, Aitana (14 October 2023). "El guiño de Bad Bunny a Shakira en su último disco" [Bad Bunny's nod to Shakira in his latest album]. HuffPost. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Topacio Long, Stephanie (25 February 2023). "Shakira & Karol G's Breakup Song "TQG" Seems To Shade Piqué Again". Bustle. Archived from the original on 11 August 2023. Retrieved 11 August 2023. Trust, Gary (6 March 2023). "The Weeknd & Ariana Grande's 'Die for You' Leaps to No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "Highest-charting Spanish-language track on the Billboard Hot 100 (female)". Guinness World Records. 22 March 2023. Archived from the original on 11 March 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Trust, Gary (6 March 2023). "Karol G & Shakira's 'TQG' Blasts In at No. 1 on Both Billboard Global Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on 8 March 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Madarang, Charisma (12 May 2023). "Shakira Releases 'Acróstico', a Love Letter to Her Children". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 17 November 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Spanos, Brittany (15 May 2023). "Shakira Sings With Her Children in Emotional 'Acróstico' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 17 August 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Garcia, Thania (29 June 2023). "Shakira Transforms Into a Mermaid in Whimsical Video for Manuel Turizo-Featuring 'Copa Vacía' Single". Variety. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Bustios, Pamela (27 July 2023). "Shakira Makes History in Top 3 Spots on Latin Pop Airplay Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Garcia, Thania (20 September 2023). "Shakira Enlists Fuerza Regida for Joint Single 'El Jefe'". Variety. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Ratner-Arias, Sigal (19 September 2023). "Edgar Barrera Tops 2023 Latin Grammys Nominees: Complete List". Billboard. Archived from the original on 23 September 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "La artista tiene tres canciones compitiendo a Canción del Año". Mix Radio (in Spanish). 19 September 2023. Archived from the original on 19 October 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Sandhar, Jasmine; Dacosta, Shaun (17 November 2023). "Latin Grammys 2023: Shakira and Karol G come out on top". BBC News. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Flores, Griselda (22 March 2024). "Shakira Turns Tears Into Diamonds With 'Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran': Stream It Now". Billboard. Retrieved 23 March 2024.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: url-status (link) Strauss, Matthew (15 February 2024). "Shakira Announces First Album in 7 Years". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. *Exposito, Suzy (22 March 2024). "Shakira Comes Back Swinging With 'Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 23 March 2024. Villa, Lucas (22 March 2024). "Shakira – 'Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran' review: empowering and renewed". NME. Retrieved 23 March 2024. Pareles, Jon (18 March 2024). "Shakira's Family Came Apart. Then Her Music Soared". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 23 March 2024. Harrison, Emma (22 March 2024). "Shakira – Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran". Clash. Retrieved 23 March 2024. Corrine, Amber (22 March 2024). "Cardi B And Shakira Team Up For Mythological "Puntería" Music Video". Vibe. Retrieved 23 March 2024. Udovitch, Mim (23 January 2002). "Q&A: Shakira – A pop artist with a rock & roll heart". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 27 November 2009. Chadha, Monica (4 September 2006). "Shakira's hips Bollywood bound?". BBC. Archived from the original on 14 February 2009. Retrieved 3 February 2010. "Shakira proud of Arab background". BBC. 4 November 2005. Archived from the original on 30 September 2009. Retrieved 3 February 2010. "Shakira". Thecelebezine.com. 8 February 2010. Archived from the original on 27 March 2008. Retrieved 5 March 2010. Lechner, Ernesto (17 October 2001). "Shakira: Laundry Service Review". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 26 June 2009. Retrieved 27 November 2009. Cobo, Leila (10 November 2001). Billboard. Vol. 113. p. 94. ISSN 0006-2510. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2013. Ma, Suzanne. "Cover Story: Shakira – A Cultural Fusion". Faze. Archived from the original on 7 September 2014. Retrieved 10 November 2013. Henderson, Alex. "Laundry Service – Shakira". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on 5 June 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2013. Petridis, Alexis (8 March 2002). "Thong songs". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 10 November 2013. "Shakira: The 'She Wolf' Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. 16 September 2009. Archived from the original on 9 July 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2009. Ditzian, Eric (21 July 2009). "Shakira Says New Album She Wolf Is 'Very Electronic'". MTV. Archived from the original on 17 December 2013. Retrieved 24 March 2014. "She Wolf". Shakira.com (Archive). Archived from the original on 9 November 2012. Retrieved 28 September 2013. "Shakira plans November release for 'Sale El Sol'". The Independent. London. 23 August 2010. Archived from the original on 24 September 2010. "Shakira – Sale El Sol – Sony Music Entertainment Germany GmbH". Sonymusic.de. Archived from the original on 11 October 2010. Retrieved 22 October 2010. "Why we still need Shakira's cultural mélange". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020. "The poet and the princess". The Guardian. UK. 8 June 2002. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 8 June 2002. Unwerth, Ellen von (5 October 2021). "Shakira Surfs Now (?!), and Other Surprises From the Most Googled Pop Star in America". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2021. Huey, Steve. "Shakira Biography". MTV. Archived from the original on 25 April 2010. Retrieved 27 November 2009. "Mini Biography – Shakira" (PDF). Daily News. Sri Lanka. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 May 2012. Retrieved 8 June 2002. "Artist Influences for Shakira". MTV. Archived from the original on 9 August 2016. Retrieved 8 July 2016. Hodgkinson, Will (19 February 2006). "Soundtrack of my life: Shakira". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Shakira's Belly Dancing Discovery". Contactmusic.com. 27 January 2006. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2007. "Everything You Might've Missed in Shakira's Super Bowl Performance". Vulture. 3 February 2020. Archived from the original on 28 February 2020. Retrieved 13 March 2020. Pittman, Taylor (4 February 2015). "Fifth Harmony Channel Their Inner Divas With Spot-On Beyoncé, Shakira Impressions". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 13 May 2019. Retrieved 3 August 2019. "Shakira's Impact on Hispanic Women". Her Campus. 29 November 2018. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2020. El Halabi, Youmna (19 November 2019). "El Dorado concert movie review". The Concordian. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Farley, Christopher John (15 February 1999). "Music: Donde Estan Los Ladrones?". Time. Archived from the original on 10 July 2021. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Blaine, Sophia (2022). "Things You Didn't Know10 Things You Didn't Know About Shakira". Classic Rock History. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023. Retrieved 1 February 2023. "Pies Descalzos". Apple Music. Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 1 February 2022. "9 Reasons Why Shakira Is a True Icon". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on 5 June 2021. Retrieved 10 August 2020. "The cross-back-over success of Shakira". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020. "'Queen of Latin Music' Shakira tunes in to trend of selling music rights". Reuters. 13 January 2021. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Weiner, Natalie (3 August 2018). "This Week in Arts: Shakira, Battery Dance Festival, 'The Sinner'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 31 December 2018. "Shakira: Rhythm queen". The Independent. 5 July 2013. Archived from the original on 29 September 2021. Retrieved 11 May 2020. Pomerantz, Dorothy (29 January 2008). "The Top-Earning Women In Music". Forbes. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "THE WORLD'S MOST POWERFUL LATINAS". Forbes. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Beyoncé, Shakira And The World's Most Powerful Female Celebrities". Forbes. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 12 May 2020. Huey, Steve. "Shakira". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 6 April 2019. "PAULINA RUBIO HOPING TO CROSS OVER BORDER LIKE SHAKIRA". MTV. 22 April 2002. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Maluma on Finding His Voice Back Again Back In Colombia For a New LP". Spin. 17 September 2020. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2020. "Watch Shakira and Trevor Noah Rock Out in a New Carpool Karaoke". TIME. 19 September 2017. Archived from the original on 1 May 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "How Shakira Has Remained a Global Superstar 25 years After "Pies Descalzos"". Entertainment Tonight. ET. 11 December 2020. Archived from the original on 11 December 2020. Retrieved 11 December 2020. "The crossover queen". The Economist. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020. "The 10 Best World Cup Songs Ever: The Definitive List From 1962 to Today". Billboard. Archived from the original on 3 July 2018. Retrieved 8 April 2020. "Laundry Service". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on 5 June 2021. Retrieved 8 April 2020. "The 100 Greatest Music Video Artists of All Time: Staff List". Billboard. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 27 August 2020. Perdomo, Anna (27 June 2021). "Shakira Mebarak, el nexo artístico entre oriente y occidente". El Correo del Golfo. Archived from the original on 27 June 2021. Retrieved 28 June 2021. "Reggaeton". Duke University Press. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018. Retrieved 12 April 2020. "The Legends". PBS. Archived from the original on 27 February 2018. Retrieved 11 May 2020. Popular Culture in the Arab World: Arts, Politics, and the Media. American University in Cairo Press. 2007. ISBN 9789774160547. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 11 May 2020. McPhate, Tim (21 September 2017). "Remember When? Shakira Unplugs For MTV, Wins Latin GRAMMY". Grammys. Archived from the original on 16 June 2020. Retrieved 5 July 2019. Hassan, Marcos (15 May 2018). "Revisiting the 10 Most Iconic Latin American 'MTV Unplugged' Performances". Remezcla. Archived from the original on 10 July 2019. Retrieved 10 July 2019. "Pop's Fluent Asset". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 18 April 2020. Retrieved 31 May 2020. Cobo, Leila (28 May 2005). "Shakira×2". Billboard. Vol. 117, no. 51. p. 23. ISSN 0006-2510. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "9 Reasons Why Shakira Is a True Icon". Entertainment Tonight. 30 January 2020. Archived from the original on 5 June 2021. Retrieved 12 April 2020. "The 200 Greatest Songs By 21st Century Women+". NPR. National Public Radio. 30 July 2018. Archived from the original on 5 August 2018. Retrieved 6 August 2018. Cantor-Navas, Judy (13 June 2013). "Top Ten World Cup Songs". Billboard. Archived from the original on 4 July 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2014. The Challenges of Globalization. Bureau of International Information Programs. 2006. ISBN 9781428966635. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 29 May 2020. "Shakira's Super Bowl success follows difficult few years for Colombian singer". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 11 February 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020. "Shakira, Shakira: Her 25-Year Career In 10 Tracks". Paper. 6 October 2020. Archived from the original on 1 February 2022. Retrieved 29 November 2020. "Google's Year in Search". Trends.google.com. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 17 August 2021. Roiz, Jessica (9 December 2020). "Shakira Crowned Google's Most-Searched Artist of 2020". Billboard. Archived from the original on 10 December 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "10 celebridades que son grandes fanáticas de otras celebridades". E! Online. July 2018. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 20 January 2024. "Filming With Shakira Was A Nightmare". NAIJ.com. 12 February 2014. Archived from the original on 14 May 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Check out these great songs by female artists on Taylor Swift's Women's History Month playlist". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 8 June 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2020. ""Admiro a Shakira y me gustaría ser como ella", dice Selena Gómez". La Nueva Provincia. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Katy Perry es fanática de Shakira y este video lo demuestra". Los40. 10 May 2017. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "The Black Eyed Peas Want To Prove Themselves Again — With A Little Help From Some Latin Stars". Billboard. 19 June 2020. Archived from the original on 20 June 2020. Retrieved 19 June 2020. "Fifth Harmony's Lauren Jauregui on Her Cultural Identity and Self Confidence: 'I Love Who I Am' (Exclusive)". E! Online. 20 October 2017. Archived from the original on 29 March 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Shakira se convirtió en el sueño incumplido de Christina Aguilera". Diario Las Americas. 13 November 2020. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "Justin Bieber ♥ Shakira". Colombia Reports. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "The best reactions to Jennifer Lopez and Shakira's Super Bowl halftime performance". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on 12 June 2020. Retrieved 12 June 2020. "Shakira & Maluma on Their 'Absolute Chemistry' & the New Latin Explosion". Billboard. Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "EXCLUSIVE: KAROL G REVEALS THAT SHAKIRA IS HER ULTIMATE LATINA POWERHOUSE". ¡Hola!. 2 April 2019. Archived from the original on 14 May 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. Digital Redaction, La Kalle (18 June 2021). ""Casi me DESMAYO", la reacción de Camilo Echeverry cuando Shakira cantó su canción". La Kalle. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "Nicky Jam: 'Soy fan de Shakira desde hace 15 años'". Univisión (in Spanish). 26 May 2017. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2021. "La estrella del Capitán Marvel, Brie Larson, reacciona ante la actuación de Shakira en su atuendo de Zootopia durante el Super Bowl - La Neta Neta" (in Spanish). 3 February 2020. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 27 October 2021. Roos, Meghan (2 February 2024). "Salma Hayek Leaves Fans in Awe by Shaking Her Hips on a Treadmill". Parade. Archived from the original on 3 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "María Becerra: "Quiero llegar al nivel de la carrera de Shakira"". www.europapress.es. 14 September 2022. Archived from the original on 16 September 2022. Retrieved 16 September 2022. "Shakira es la inspiración de Dulce María - Generaccion.com". www.generaccion.com. Archived from the original on 30 October 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2021. "Interview: Anuel AA Talks 'Emmanuel' & Collaborations". idolator. 9 June 2020. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 22 May 2022. "Tini Stoessel, cantante y actriz: "Desde los 14 años no sabía lo que era dormir un mes en la misma cama"". La Voz de Galicia (in Spanish). 12 June 2021. Archived from the original on 7 October 2021. Retrieved 27 October 2021. Los40Urban (22 September 2022), Entrevista Ozuna Su Canción Con Shakira, Ozutochi, Tiago PZK... LOS 40 Urban, retrieved 25 September 2022{{citation}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Natti Natasha se siente ganadora simplemente por competir con Shakira y JLo". W Radio. 6 February 2016. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "La respuesta de Shakira a las palabras de admiración de Rosalía". HOLA (in Spanish). 3 September 2022. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 5 March 2024. "Carla Morrison "Yo quiero ser fuerte como Shakira"". www.milenio.com (in Mexican Spanish). 9 September 2016. Archived from the original on 1 November 2021. Retrieved 1 November 2021. Lopez, Julyssa (10 February 2022). "Ibeyi Announce Third Album With Triumphant Single 'Sister 2 Sister'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 22 May 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2022. "Flo Milli Is Here to Stay". W Magazine. 8 June 2021. Archived from the original on 22 May 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2022. "Quiere Manuel Turizo dejar huella con su nuevo tema Te Olvido". Periódico Zócalo | Noticias de Saltillo, Piedras Negras, Monclova, Acuña (in Mexican Spanish). Archived from the original on 1 December 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2021. Cascales, Agustín Gómez (12 July 2021). "Elena Rose: "Educar al hombre, que desgraciadamente sigue siendo muy machista, es importante"". Shangay (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2022. Culto, Equipo de (1 October 2021). "Mi disco favorito: ¿Dónde están los ladrones? de Shakira | por Francisca Valenzuela". La Tercera. Archived from the original on 2 October 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2021. Paloma Mami entevista en la alfombra roja de los Latin Grammy 2021, retrieved 28 November 2021 "Natalia Lafourcade en su mundo". www.elcolombiano.com (in European Spanish). 10 September 2012. Archived from the original on 4 March 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2021. "Kali Uchis: La artista colombiana que vive sin miedo". GQ (in Spanish). 8 April 2021. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 9 April 2021. "Ed Sheeran Quiere Hacer una Canción en Español con Shakira o Camila Cabello". Happyfm. 9 June 2017. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 27 October 2021. Farina Feat Shakira La Paisa Habla Sobre Colaborar Con La Barranquillera 360 P, retrieved 31 August 2021 Influencias de Jbalvin, retrieved 31 August 2021 "Lele Pons Bursts Into Tears of Joy Meeting Shakira: 'She Means Everything to Me'". Billboard. Archived from the original on 18 June 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Andrés Cuervo: "Shakira es una gran inspiración para mí"". People en Español. Archived from the original on 17 May 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. Shakira粉丝站. ""李宇春唯一的偶像"—李宇春夸赞夏奇拉合集". www.bilibili.com. Archived from the original on 17 July 2022. Retrieved 9 June 2022. Villa, Lucas (12 August 2021). "Prince Royce Talks Embracing His Bachata Roots, Making History + New Single "Lao' A Lao'"". we are Mitú. 100% American & Latino. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2021. "Romeo Santos le dedicó un emotivo mensaje a Shakira | Noticias". Radio Moda (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Greeicy sigue con el listado de sueños por cumplir y artistas por conocer". W Radio (in Spanish). 9 October 2021. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2022. Wendy Sulca: ´Sería un sueño ser como Shakira´, Radio Programas del Perú, 28 April 2014, archived from the original on 29 April 2019, retrieved 20 May 2019 "¿Qué opina Anitta de Pabllo Vittar, Caetano Veloso, Shakira o Madonna?". Shock (in Spanish). 16 July 2019. Archived from the original on 23 May 2022. Retrieved 1 August 2021. ElPais (3 December 2021). "Nathy Peluso: de cantar en bares de Madrid a ganar un Grammy Latino". Diario EL PAIS Uruguay (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 6 December 2021. Retrieved 22 May 2022. "Britney on music, 'Boys' and Austin's powers". CNN. Archived from the original on 23 June 2021. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "Cardi B Reacts to Shakira Singing 'I Like It' at the Super Bowl Halftime Show | Entertainment Tonight". Entertainment Tonight. 3 February 2020. Archived from the original on 10 August 2021. Retrieved 12 August 2021. LOS40 (20 March 2020). "Rita Ora: "Los éxitos, los fracasos y los errores me permiten aprender y seguir adelante"". LOS40 (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 27 January 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "[轉錄新聞]吳建豪送巧克力 又願為她受苦 夏奇拉感動回送香吻 - f4". PTT娛樂區 (in Traditional Chinese). 26 April 2002. Archived from the original on 22 January 2022. Retrieved 12 May 2022. Izquierdo, Por Ignacio (22 July 2023). "Danna Paola se encontró con Shakira y así reaccionó la mexicana". infobae (in European Spanish). Archived from the original on 4 January 2024. Retrieved 4 January 2024. "Emilia le da la razón a Shakira en sus canciones de desamor: 'Siempre tiene las palabras exactas'". HOLA (in Spanish). 9 May 2023. Archived from the original on 4 January 2024. Retrieved 4 January 2024. "La joven cantautora puertorriqueña GALE se une a la familia de Sony Music Latin". Sony Music Entertainment Latin. 17 February 2022. Archived from the original on 14 April 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022. "Sofia Reyes Says Shakira Is 'One Of My Biggest Inspirations': 'I Would Love To' Meet Her". OkMagazine. Archived from the original on 5 May 2022. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "Camila Cabello's tears over Ed Sheeran". Madison.com. October 7, 2017. Archived from the original on January 19, 2018. Retrieved January 19, 2018. "Sebastián Yatra: "No me gusta que todo deba tener un orden"". Ultima Hora (in Spanish). 20 July 2022. Archived from the original on 24 July 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2022. "Paty Cantú dedica mensaje a Shakira por su nuevo álbum: 'Será un placer verte brillar y renacer'". El Financiero (in Spanish). 25 September 2022. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 25 September 2022. "Simaria Mendes; quién es, biografía y todo lo que debes saber sobre ella". Glamour (in Mexican Spanish). 16 November 2021. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "En La Sala with host Becky G: Now on Amazon Music". Amazon. Archived from the original on 5 April 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2020. "Sasha Keable recruits Jorja Smith for new song "Killing Me"". The FADER. Archived from the original on 22 May 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2022. "Belinda, Lola y Tini regresan a la escuela". El Diario de Chihuahua (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 15 May 2022. Solá-Santiago, Frances (13 March 2024). "Everybody Loves Young Miko". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 13 March 2024. Shaikh, Samina. "Nora Fatehi on comparisons with Shakira for 'Dance Meri Rani': We weren't trying to copy her, she's not the only one with curly Afro hair - Exclusive". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 27 December 2021. Retrieved 30 December 2021. Viralbpm (24 June 2018). "Shakira inspires Kris Kross Amsterdam & The Boy Next Door on 'Whenever'". Viralbpm. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Bad Gyal aún no se cree que esté en disco de Karol G con Shakira". es-us.vida-estilo.yahoo.com (in Spanish). 27 February 2023. Archived from the original on 15 March 2023. Retrieved 15 March 2023. Delgadillo, Ulises. "Jackson Wang realiza un cover de Shakira y Bizarrap". La Verdad. Archived from the original on 2 February 2023. Retrieved 2 February 2023. Loaeza, Dania (25 April 2023). "Así canta Kenia Os 'Antología' de Shakira en concierto de Acapulco y le piden colaboración". Debate. Archived from the original on 25 May 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2024. "Mon Laferte revela que sueña con hacer música con Shakira: "Ha sido una de mis grandes influencias"". TELEMUNDO.com (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 1 March 2024. Retrieved 1 March 2024. "Stream: Ayra Starr Unveils Self-Titled Debut EP". The Guardian Nigeria News - Nigeria and World News. 22 January 2021. Archived from the original on 16 September 2021. Retrieved 16 September 2021. "Top 50 World's Greatest Leader". Fortune. Archived from the original on 2 April 2017. Retrieved 28 January 2018. "The making of Saint Shakira". The Guardian. 22 November 2009. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "The hits don't lie: Why Shakira is living proof that pop and politics can mix". The Independent. 23 October 2011. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 5 June 2020. "Shakira's Monuments". Colombia.Travel. Archived from the original on 2 August 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Shakira leaves her mark in hometown of Tannourine". An-Nahar. 13 July 2018. Archived from the original on 19 December 2018. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Shakira's home city unveils giant statue of 'Hips Don't Lie' singer". 30 December 2023. Archived from the original on 1 January 2024. Retrieved 1 January 2024. "Who Are The Top Latin GRAMMY Winners Of All Time?". The Latin Recording Academy. 26 September 2017. Archived from the original on 27 November 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2018. Keever, Matthew (10 April 2019). "Women Who Should Be In The Rock & Roll Hall Of Fame – Shakira". Houston Press. Archived from the original on 31 July 2020. Retrieved 10 April 2019. "Billboard". Nielsen Business Media, Inc. 28 May 2005. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 11 March 2022. Estevez, Marjua (17 October 2017). "The Top 25 Biggest Selling Latin Albums of the Last 25 Years: Selena, Shakira & More". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 18 October 2017. "Decade-End Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on 14 December 2009. Retrieved 25 May 2013. "Shakira – Shakira Scores Most-Played Record". Contactmusic.com. Archived from the original on 23 February 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2009. "BBC – Music -Shakira". BBC. Archived from the original on 23 April 2010. Retrieved 20 March 2010. "Shakira Chart History (Hot Latin Songs)". Billboard. Archived from the original on 12 October 2023. Retrieved 3 October 2023. Mendizabal, Amaya (12 February 2018). "Luis Fonsi & Daddy Yankee's 'Despacito' Breaks Hot Latin Songs Record for Most Weeks at No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on 25 March 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2020. "Shakira Chart History (Latin Digital Song Sales)". Billboard. Archived from the original on 25 October 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2023. "Shakira Chart History (Latin Airplay)". Billboard. Archived from the original on 30 January 2023. Retrieved 14 November 2023. Barber (3 May 2010). "Shakira Most Downloaded Latin Artist". TMM – The Music Magazine. Archived from the original on 12 March 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2010. Barber (10 December 2010). "Year-End: Online Video's Most Viral Artists of 2010". Billboard. Archived from the original on 4 October 2012. Retrieved 28 February 2011. "Photos: Shakira Honored As 2011 Latin Recording Academy Person Of The Year". B96 Chicago. 10 November 2011. Archived from the original on 14 November 2011. "Shakira named Artist of the Year". Harvard News. 16 February 2011. Archived from the original on 1 February 2020. Retrieved 10 April 2020. "Shakira to be honored with star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame". Shakira.com. 1 November 2011. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2012. Ramon (10 November 2011). "Shakira to be honored with star on the Hollywood Walk of fame". ShakiraMedia.com. Archived from the original on 9 November 2011. Retrieved 12 November 2011. "New addition to Hollywood walk revealed". Ireland On-line. 21 June 2008. Archived from the original on 13 October 2008. Retrieved 31 October 2009. "Shakira receives Ordre des Arts et des Lettres award". Shakira.com. 28 January 2012. Archived from the original on 14 November 2012. Retrieved 10 July 2012. "Asteroid Freddiemercury and 12 other peculiar things named after pop stars". BBC. 7 September 2016. Retrieved 17 September 2018. "New wasp species named after Shakira for its 'dance-inducing' larvae". GMA News Online. 12 May 2014. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "The World's 100 Most Powerful Women". Forbes. Archived from the original on 29 August 2012. "The World's 100 Most Powerful Women". Forbes. Archived from the original on 26 May 2013. "The World's 100 Most Powerful Women". Forbes. Archived from the original on 31 May 2014. "The 30 Most Influential People on the Internet". Time. Retrieved 31 May 2020. Lee, Carol E. (5 October 2011). "Obama Picks Shakira for Advisory Panel". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 31 May 2020. "Celebrating a Decade of Discovery on Spotify". Spotify. 10 October 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2019. "Shakira breaks new record with singles from four different decades". Shock.co. 31 May 2020. Retrieved 31 May 2020. Feigin, Sara (31 January 2020). "Shakira net worth 2020: How did the 'Hips Don't Lie' singer make her millions?" ES Magazine (Evening Standard). Retrieved 19 July 2020. "El Oasis". IMDb. Retrieved 28 September 2014. "The Rhythm of Shakira". Puig.com. Retrieved 28 September 2014. "Advanced Search for Perfumes – Parfumo". Parfumo.net. Retrieved 17 August 2021. Shaul, Brandy (15 October 2015). "Rovio Launches Love Rocks Starring Shakira on iOS, Android | SocialTimes". Adweek. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Kit, Borys (14 August 2015). "Shakira Joins Voice Cast of Disney Animation's 'Zootopia'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 14 August 2015. "This News Don't Lie: Shakira is Coming to a Disney Movie Near You". Disney Playlist. 14 August 2015. Retrieved 15 August 2015. Mamo, Heran (14 December 2021). "Shakira Is Launching a New Dance Competition Show With NBC". Billboard. Retrieved 14 December 2021. "The Schools". Fundación Pies Descalzos. Archived from the original on 11 May 2012. Hildago, Serafín (7 April 2014). "Shakira: Hero Award Winner at Radio Disney Music Awards 2014". One News Page. Archived from the original on 31 July 2014. Retrieved 30 April 2017.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Parsley, Aaron (4 April 2006). "Shakira Honored at United Nations". Teenpeople.com. Archived from the original on 18 June 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Shakira honoured by United Nations". The Belfast Telegraph. Retrieved 4 March 2010. "Free Your Mind: Shakira". MTV Europe. 7 November 2010. Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 7 November 2010. "Shakira a Sarkozy: "Todos somos gitanos"". elreferente.es. Archived from the original on 28 February 2011. Retrieved 22 February 2019. "Barça agreement with Shakira". Mundo Deportivo. 1 March 2011. Archived from the original on 3 March 2011. Retrieved 12 November 2011. "Shakira Named Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. 26 September 2011. "White House Initiative on Educational Excellence for Hispanics to Convene President's Advisory Commission Members". United States Department of Education. "World Literacy Foundation announces that Shakira wins 2020 Global Literacy Award for her significant contribution to literacy". Yahoo. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Downs, Ray (18 June 2018). "Ivan Duque Wins Colombian Presidential Race". UPI Top News. "Shakira reclama al Gobierno por presupuesto para la educación". elheraldo.co (in Spanish). 2 November 2018. Retrieved 26 May 2019. "The Earthshot Prize Council". The Earthshot Prize. "Sh7bn environment 'Nobel' prize launched". Nation. 9 October 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2020. "Shakira dona mascarillas y respiradores para combatir covid-19" [Shakira donates masks and respirators to combat covid-19]. Milenio (in Spanish). 1 May 2020. Retrieved 6 May 2021. "El fuerte mensaje de Shakira al presidente Iván Duque tras la represión en Colombia: "Pare ya la violación a los derechos humanos"" [Shakira's strong message to President Iván Duque after the repression in Colombia: "Stop the violation of human rights now"]. Radio Mitre (in Spanish). 5 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Shakira se pronuncia por protestas en Colombia y pide al gobierno: "Pare ya la violación de DD.HH."" [Shakira speaks out for protests in Colombia and asks the government: "Stop the violation of human rights now."] (in Spanish). CNN Chile. 4 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. Clark, Cindy (30 July 2009). "Shakira breaks out of her cage for 'She Wolf' album, video". USA Today. Retrieved 17 December 2009. "France, 1/10/11". Shakira.com. 10 January 2011. Archived from the original on 2 February 2013. Retrieved 10 July 2012. "Antonio de la Rúa, Shakira's Ex-Boyfriend, Sues Star For $250 Million". HuffPost. 6 September 2012. Retrieved 24 January 2013. "Shakira Sued for $100 Million by Ex-Manager". The Hollywood Reporter. 12 April 2013. Retrieved 14 April 2013. "Shakira Wins: Ex-Boyfriend's Lawsuit Dismissed, Singer "Could Not Be Happier Now"". E! News. 2 August 2013. Retrieved 10 October 2016. "Piqué confirms Shakira relationship on request from Barcelona coach Guardiola". tribalfootball.com. Archived from the original on 9 February 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2011. "Gerard Piqué and Shakira spotted together again". whoateallthepies.tv. Archived from the original on 23 November 2010. Retrieved 22 November 2010. "Shakira welcomes baby boy Milan Piqué Mebarak". NBC News. Archived from the original on 7 April 2016. Retrieved 23 January 2013. "Shakira welcomes second baby boy Sasha Piqué Mebarak". Shakira News. Archived from the original on 7 February 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2015. "World's Most Powerful Couples". Forbes. Retrieved 11 May 2020.[dead link] Rebaza, Claudia; Sottile, Zoe (4 June 2022). "Shakira and footballer Gerard Piqué announce split". CNN. Retrieved 4 June 2022. Streva, Virginia (24 April 2020). "Shakira completes ancient philosophy course at Penn while social distancing". Philly Voice. Retrieved 14 April 2021. Alecci, Scilla (10 November 2017). "Shakira, Nicole Kidman, Akira Toriyama offshore links revealed in Paradise Papers". ICIJ. Retrieved 2 November 2021. Nolan, Emma (29 July 2021). "Shakira tax evasion charges explained as singer likely to face trial". Newsweek. Retrieved 2 November 2021. McGoey, Sean (4 October 2021). "5 ways celebrities in the Pandora Papers use the offshore system". ICIJ. Retrieved 2 November 2021. "Shakira refuses to settle with Spanish prosecutor to end tax fraud case". Reuters. 27 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Spain seeks eight-year jail term for Shakira in unpaid taxes case". the Guardian. Reuters. 29 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Shakira: Prosecutor seeks eight-year sentence for star over tax evasion". BBC News. 29 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Pop singer Shakira ordered to stand trial on tax fraud charges in Spain". NBC News. 27 August 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Spencer-Elliott, Lydia (11 July 2023). "Could Shakira Really Be Going to Jail if Found Guilty of £12 Million Tax Fraud?". MSN. Retrieved 19 July 2023. "What to Know About Shakira's Pending Trial for Tax Fraud". Time. 29 September 2022. Retrieved 14 January 2023. Bushby, Helen (20 November 2023). "Shakira: Singer settles Spanish tax fraud case with €7.5m fine". BBC News. Retrieved 20 November 2023. VH1 Driven: Shakira (article) VH1 Driven: Shakira (video) "Video – VH1 – Driven Shakira (11–22–05)". ShakiraMedia.com. Archived from the original on 3 May 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Book: Woman Full of Grace by Ximena Diego "Shakira: Woman Full of Grace ~ Ximena Diego ~ eBookMall ~ eBooks". Ebookmall.com. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Pareles, Jon (14 November 2005). "Shakira, from lip to hip". New Straits Times, p. L3. "Shakira pertahan orang Arab". (8 November 2005). Berita Harian, p. 13. Frank Cogan's review of Laundry Service for The Village Voice "New York Music – River Deep, Freckle High – page 1". The Village Voice. 25 December 2001. Archived from the original on 8 October 2008. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Chart Performance for "Don't Bother" from the Billboard Hot 100 Chart Performance for Oral Fixation 2 "Building Album Sales Chart". HITS Daily Double. Archived from the original on 15 September 2014. Retrieved 31 October 2009. New York Times Magazine article on Shakira's philanthropic work on education. Wikiquote has quotations related to Shakira. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shakira. Official website Shakira at AllMusic Shakira at IMDb