Čiko Markss (Chico Marx), Harpo Markss (Harpo Marx), Graučo Markss (Groucho Marx), Gummo Markss (Gummo Marx) un Zepo Markss (Zeppo Marx), pazīstami arī kā brāļi Marksi (Marx Brothers), bija amerikāņu ģimenes komiķu grupa, kas darbojās no 1905. līdz 1949. gadam Brodvejā, gūstot panākumus vodeviļas žanrā, kā arī kino. Piecas no 13 filmām, kurās brāļi filmējās, iekļautas Amerikas Kinoinstitūta veidotajā 100 labāko komēdiju sarakstā, no kurām divas (Duck Soup un A Night at the Opera) iekļuva pirmajā divpadsmitniekā. Grupas jaunākie brāļi (Gummo un Zepo) to vēlāk pameta un pievērsās uzņēmējdarbībai, izveidojot vienu no lielākajām talantu aģentūrām Holivudā. Gummo nepiedalījās nevienā no filmām, bet Zepo piedalījās tikai pirmajās piecās filmās. «Chico Marx, Stage and Film Comedian, Dies at 70; Oldest of 5 Brothers Took Role of Italian Piano Player. Team Business manager.». The New York Times. 1961. gada 12. oktobris. Kopā ar |accessdate= jālieto |url= «Harpo Marx, the Silent Comedian, Is Dead at 70; Blond-Wigged, Horn-Tooting Star Scored on Stage and in Films With Brothers Harpo Marx, Silent Comedian, Dies.». The New York Times. September 29, 1964, Tuesday. Harpo Marx, the blond-wigged, nonspeaking member of the Marx Brothers team, died tonight at 8:30 in Mount Sinai Hospital. He was 70 years old. Kopā ar |accessdate= jālieto |url= «Groucho Marx, Comedian, Dead. Movie Star and TV Host Was 86. Master of the Insult Groucho Marx, Film Comedian and Host of 'You Bet Your Life,' Dies.». The New York Times. August 20, 1977, Saturday. Los Angeles, August 19, 1977 Groucho Marx, the comedian, died tonight at the Cedar Sinai Medical Center here after failing to recover from a respiratory ailment that hospitalized him June 22. He was 86 years old. Kopā ar |accessdate= jālieto |url= «Gummo Marx, Managed Comedians.». The New York Times. Palm Springs, California, April 21, 1977 (Reuters) Gummo Marx, an original member of the Marx brothers' comedy team, died here today. He was 83 years old. Kopā ar |accessdate= jālieto |url= «Zeppo Marx Dies on Coast at 78; Last Survivor of Comedy Team; 'Tired of Being a Stooge'.». The New York Times. 1979. gada 1. decembris. Zeppo Marx, the surviving member of the Marx Brothers comedy team who left the quartet in 1934 for other businesses, died yesterday at Eisenhower Medical Center in Palm Springs, Calif. The youngest of the brothers, he was 78 years old and had lived in Pal... Kopā ar |accessdate= jālieto |url= Vikikrātuvē par šo tēmu ir pieejami multivides faili. Skatīt: Brāļi Marksi. IMDb profils (angliski) Internet Broadway Database profils (angliski) Oficiālā tīmekļa vietne