Kinoakadēmijas goda balva (angļu: Academy Honorary Award) ir speciālā Kino mākslas un zinātnes akadēmijas balva, ko akadēmija pirmo reizi pasniedza 1948. gadā, 21. Kinoakadēmijas balvas ceremonijas laikā, iepriekš tā saucās Speciālā balva. Balva tiek piešķirta vadoties pēc Kino mākslas un zinātnes akadēmijas Vadītāju padomes ( Board of Governors) ieskatiem, lai atzīmētu sasniegumus kinematogrāfā, kurus nevar iekļaut nevienā no Amerikas Kinoakadēmijas balvu kategorijām. Bieži vien šīs balvas ieguvēji agrāk jau ir saņēmuši arī kādu no pamatbalvām, viņu vidū ir Mērija Pikforda, Moriss Ševaljē, Lorenss Olivjē, Aleks Giness, Džeimss Stjuarts, Sofija Lorena, Sidnijs Puatjē un citi. Godalgotajām personām parasti tiek pasniegtas tādas pašas zelta Oskara statuetes, kā citās nominācijās. Tomēr dažkārt ir pasniegtas arī cita veida balvas — medaļa, goda raksts, sertifikāts par nopelniem u.c. Atšķirībā no Balvas par īpašiem sasniegumiem, ko ieviesa 1972. gadā, Kinoakadēmijas goda balva netiek piešķirta par konkrētu gadu vai filmu. Kopš 2009. gada Kinoakadēmijas goda balvu, kā arī divas citas balvas (Džīna Heršolta humanitāro balvu un Ērvinga Tālberga memoriālo balvu (Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award)) pasniedz atsevišķā Governors Awards ceremonijā, nevis, kā agrāk, galvenajā Amerikas Kinoakadēmijas balvu pasniegšanas ceremonijā. Goda balvu laureāti galvenajā ceremonijā parādās tikai uz brīdi kopā ar visu citu nomināciju laureātiem noslēgumā. Visvairāk reižu Kinoakadēmijas goda balvu saņēmis Bobs Houps, kurš ir godināts 4 reizes. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. «About Academy Awards: Honorary Award» (Web). Official Academy Award Website. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) Oscars.org. Arhivēts no oriģināla, laiks: 2008-04-09. Skatīts: 2008-07-29. The Academy's Honorary Award is given to honor extraordinary distinction in lifetime achievement, exceptional contributions to the state of motion picture arts and sciences, or for outstanding service to the Academy. It is given at the discretion of the Board of Governors and is not necessarily given every year, although the last year it was not given before 2008 was 1987. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. «About Academy Awards: Honorary Award» (Web). Official Academy Award Website. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS), Oscars.org. Arhivēts no oriģināla, laiks: 2008-04-09. Skatīts: 2008-08-01. The Honorary Award can also take the form of a life membership in the Academy, a scroll, a medal, a certificate or any other design chosen by the Board of Governors. The John A. Bonner Medal of Commendation, given for 'outstanding service and dedication in upholding the high standards of the Academy,' is considered an Honorary Award. It is usually given at the annual presentation of Scientific and Technical Awards, a dinner ceremony separate from the annual telecast. «Special Achievement Award». Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Arhivēts no oriģināla, laiks: 2008. gada 7. janvārī. Skatīts: 2018. gada 18. jūlijā. Governors Awards at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences 6 September 2010. Removing him from the contests in which he had been nominated for an Academy Award in the "competitive classes", the Academy gave Chaplin this "Special Award" because, as it wrote to him, his "collective accomplishments" in The Circus merited his placement "in a class" by himself. «Special Award to Charles Chaplin» (Web). Official Academy Award Database. AMPAS, Oscars.org. Arhivēts no oriģināla, laiks: 2012-01-12. Skatīts: 2008-07-29. [NOTE: The Academy Board of Judges on merit awards for individual achievements in motion picture arts during the year ending August 1, 1928, unanimously decided that your name should be removed from the competitive classes, and that a special first award be conferred upon you for writing, acting, directing and producing The Circus. The collective accomplishments thus displayed place you in a class by yourself." (Letter from the Academy to Mr. Chaplin, dated February 19, 1929.)] Bosley Crowther. «Movie Review: 'Kukan,' a Vivid Fact Film about Modern China and Its Myriad Peoples, Is Seen at the World» (Web). The New York Times, Movies (movies.nytimes.com), 1941-06-24. Skatīts: 2008-07-30. Crowther refers to filmmaker as a "young newspaperman, Rey Scott" in the text of this review; credits (at foot of page) describe this film as "A travel picture filmed in color in China and narrated by Ray Veidne:Sic Scott. Baskett was the first African-American actor to receive an Oscar; this "Special Award", which he received at the 20th Academy Awards ceremony, held on March 20, 1948, effectively removed him from contention for a best actor award for his role of Uncle Remus; he died of heart disease on July 9, 1948. Oscars.org Oficiālā Kinoakadēmijas mājaslapa (angliski) Oficiālā Kinoakadēmijas balvu datubāze Arhivēts 2008. gada 13. septembrī, Wayback Machine vietnē. (angliski) Kinoakadēmijas goda balva Oficiālā Kinoakadēmijas mājaslapa (angliski)